.TH groff_www @MAN7EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
groff_www \- GNU
.I roff
macros for authoring web pages
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2000-2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" This file is part of groff, the GNU roff type-setting system.
.\"
.\" This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_groff_www_7_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.\" Define fallback for groff 1.23's MR macro if the system lacks it.
.nr do-fallback 0
.if !\n(.f           .nr do-fallback 1 \" mandoc
.if  \n(.g .if !d MR .nr do-fallback 1 \" older groff
.if !\n(.g           .nr do-fallback 1 \" non-groff *roff
.if \n[do-fallback]  \{\
.  de MR
.    ie \\n(.$=1 \
.      I \%\\$1
.    el \
.      IR \%\\$1 (\\$2)\\$3
.  .
.\}
.rr do-fallback
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY "groff \-m www"
.RI [ option\~ .\|.\|.\&]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
This manual page describes the GNU
.I www
macro package,
which is part of the
.MR groff @MAN7EXT@
document formatting system.
.
This macro file is automatically loaded by the default
.I troffrc
file when the formatter
(usually
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@ )
is called with either of the options
.RB \[lq] \-T\~html \[rq]
or
.RB \[lq] \-T\~xhtml \[rq].
.
The HTML output driver
.MR grohtml 1
is in a beta state;
.I groff
distributes these macros to encourage its testing.
.
.
.P
.TS
tab(@);
L  L
Lb L.
Macro@Meaning
_
JOBNAME@split output into multiple files
HX@automatic heading level cut-off
BCL@specify colours on a web page
BGIMG@specify background image
URL@create a URL using two parameters
MTO@create an HTML email address
TAG@generate an HTML name
IMG@include an image file
PIMG@include PNG image
MPIMG@place PNG on the margin and wrap text around it
HnS@begin heading
HnE@end heading
LK@emit automatically collected links
HR@produce a horizontal rule
NHR@suppress automatic generation of rules
HTL@record document title as HTML metadata only
HEAD@add data to <head> block
ULS@unordered list begin
ULE@unordered list end
OLS@ordered list begin
OLE@ordered list end
DLS@definition list begin
DLE@definition list end
LI@insert a list item
DC@generate a drop capital
HTML@transmit raw HTML to output driver
CDS@code example begin
CDE@code example end
ALN@place links on left of main text
LNS@start two-column table with links on the left
LNE@end two-column table started with \fB.LNS\fP
LINKSTYLE@initialize default URL attributes
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Macros
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP 9n \" "HTML" + 2n + hand-tuned for PDF
.BI JOBNAME\~ file-name-stem
Split output into multiple HTML files.
.
In
.I ms
documents,
a file is split whenever an
.B .SH
or
.RB \[lq] ".NH\~1" \[rq]
call is encountered.
.
Its argument is the file name stem used for output files.
.
This option is equivalent to
.IR \%grohtml 's
.B \-j
option.
.
.
.TP
.BI HX\~ n
Set section heading level above which
.I \%grohtml
is not to automatically generate links to
.I n.
.
For example,
when used with the
.MR groff_ms @MAN7EXT@
package,
.RB \[lq] ".HX\~2" \[rq]
causes
.I \%grohtml
to generate a list of links for
.I ms
macro calls
.RB \[lq] ".NH\~1" \[rq]
and
.RB \[lq] ".NH\~2" \[rq]
but not for
.RB \[lq] ".NH\~3" \[rq],
whereas
.RB \[lq] ".HX\~0" \[rq]
generates no hyperlinks to section headings.
.
Giving
.I groff
the option
.RB \[lq] "\-P\~\-l" \[rq]
disables automatic heading linkage.
.
.
.TP
.BI BCL\~ "foreground background active not-visited visited"
Configure colours used for
page foreground,
page background,
active hypertext link,
hypertext links not yet visited,
and visited hypertext links.
.
.
.TP
.BI BGIMG\~ file
Set the background image
to
.I file.
.
.
.TP
.BI URL\~ url\~\c
.RI [ link-text \~[ post ]]
Generate a hyperlink to
.I url
with optional
.I link-text
followed immediately by non-linked text
.I post.
.
.
.IP
If
.I link-text
is absent,
.I url
is formatted as the link text.
.
Hyphenation is disabled while formatting a URL;
insert explicit break points with the
.B \[rs]:
escape sequence.
.
.
.TP
.BI MTO\~ address\~\c
.RI [ link-text \~[ post ]]
Generate an email hyperlink to
.I address
with optional
.I link-text
followed immediately by non-linked text
.I post.
.
.
.IP
If
.I link-text
is absent,
.I address
is formatted as the link text.
.
Hyphenation is disabled while formatting a URL;
insert explicit break points with the
.B \[rs]:
escape sequence.
.
.
.TP
.BI TAG\~ name
Generate an anchor
.I name
marking its location in the document as a target for hyperlinks.
.
.
.TP
.BI IMG\~ file-name\~\c
.RB [ \-C | \-L | \-R ]\~\c
.RI [ width \~[ height ]]
Insert graphical image
.I file-name.
.
The optional second argument aligns the image to the center
.RB ( \-C ;\~default),
left
.RB ( \-L ),
or
right
.RB ( \-R ).
.
The optional
.I width
defaults to 100 units
(in the context of the HTML renderer)
and the optional
.I height
to the same measurement as
.I width .
.
.
.TP
.BR PIMG\~ [ \-C | \-L | \-R ]\~\c
.IR file-name\~ [ width \~[ height ]]
Insert graphical image
.I file-name,
assumed to be in PNG format.
.
Compared to
.BR IMG ,
this macro has the advantage of working with both PostScript and HTML
devices since it converts
.I file-name
into EPS format using
.MR pngtopnm 1 ,
.MR pnmcrop 1 ,
and
.MR pnmtops 1 .
.
.I height
and
.I width
may be given as percentages
(of the line length
.B \[rs]n[.l]
and page length
.BR \[rs]n[.p] ,
respectively).
.
.
.IP
If the document isn't processed with
.RB \[lq] \-T\~html \[rq]
or
.RB \[lq] \-T\~xhtml \[rq],
you must use
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@ 's
.B \-U
option.
.\" XXX: stale?  Does this predate the `psbb` request?
.
.
.TP
.BR MPIMG\~ [ \-L | \-R ]\~[ \-G\~\c
.IR gap ]\~\c
.IR file-name\~ [ width \~[ height ]]
As
.BR PIMG ,
but place the image at a margin and wrap text around it.
.
The image is aligned the to the left
.RB ( \-L ,
default)
or right
.RB ( \-R )
margin.
.
.BI \-G \~gap
imposes horizontal space of
.I gap
pixels between the picture and the text that wraps around it.
.
The default
.I gap
is zero.
.
.
.TP
.BI HnS\~ n
Begin heading at level
.I n.
.
.
.TP
.B HnE
End heading text.
.
.
.TP
.B LK
Direct
.I \%grohtml
to emit the list of automatically generated hyperlinks at this location.
.
.
.TP
.B HR
Generate a full-width horizontal rule when used with
.RB \[lq] \-T\~html \[rq]
or
.RB \[lq] \-T\~xhtml \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.B NHR
Suppress the horizontal rules at the document's top and bottom that
.I \%grohtml
emits by default.
.
.
.TP
.B HTL
Generate an HTML title only.
.
This differs from
.MR groff_ms @MAN7EXT@ 's
.B TL
macro,
which generates both an HTML title and an <H1> heading.
.
Use it to provide an HTML title as document metadata but not as
formatted text.
.
The title ends when vertical space
.RB ( .sp )
or a break
.RB ( .br )
is seen.
.
.
.TP
.B HEAD
Add arbitrary data to the HTML <head> element.
.
Ignored if not processed with
.RB \[lq] \-T\~html \[rq]
or
.RB \[lq] \-T\~xhtml \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.B HTML
All text after this macro is treated as raw HTML.
.
Ignored if not processed with
.RB \[lq] \-T\~html \[rq]
or
.RB \[lq] \-T\~xhtml \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.BI DC\~ "L text"\~\c
.RI [ color ]
Format a \[lq]drop cap\[rq]\[em]a large character
.I L
(usually a capital letter)
at a larger size and with a lower text baseline
than the following
.I text,
such that the cap-heights of
.I L
and
.I text
align,
in the specified
.I color
(default: black).
.
.
.TP
.B CDS
Begin code display;
a monospaced font is selected and filling is disabled.
.
.
.TP
.B CDE
End code display.
.
.
.TP
.BR ALN \~\c
.RI [ color\~ [ width-percentage ]]
Enable a \[lq]navigation pane\[rq] containing links to section headings,
aligned to the left of running text,
and configure its rendering parameters.
.
Columnation is achieved with an HTML table.
.
.I color
indicates an HTML background color to be used in the navigation column;
the default is
.BR #eeeeee .
.
.I width-percentage
allocates the given percentage of the the navigation pane's table
column;
the default is
.BR 30 .
.
Call this macro at most once,
at the beginning of the document.
.
.
.TP
.B LNS
Begin text indexed by the navigation pane configured by
.BR ALN .
.
.
.TP
.B LNE
End text indexed by navigation pane started by
.BR LNS .
.
.
.TP
.BI LINKSTYLE\~ color\~\c
.RI [ font-style\~ [ "open-glyph close-glyph" ]]
Configure rendering of formatted hyperlink targets for devices other
than
.B html
and
.BR xhtml ;
render
targets in
.I color
(default:
blue) \" XXX: whose default?  the browser's?
using the typeface
.I font-style
(default:
.BR CR )
bracketed with
.I open-glyph
and
.I close-glyph
(defaults:
.B \[rs][la]
and
.BR \[rs][ra] ,
respectively).
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Section heading links"
.\" ====================================================================
.
By default
.I \%grohtml
generates links to all section headings and places these at the top of
the HTML document.
.
Configure this behavior with
.B HX
and/or
.BR LK .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Limitations of \f[I]grohtml\f[]"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.MR @g@tbl @MAN1EXT@
tables are rendered as PNG images.
.
Paul DuBois's approach with
.MR tblcvt 1 ,
part of the
.UR http://\:www\:.snake\:.net/\:software/\:troffcvt/
.I troffcvt
distribution
.UE ,
should be explored.
.
.
.P
All URLs currently are treated as consuming no textual
space in
.IR groff .
.
This could be considered as a bug since it causes some problems.
.
To circumvent this,
.I www.tmac
inserts a zero-width character which expands to a harmless space
(only
if run with
.B \-Thtml
or
.BR \-Txhtml ).
.
.
.P
Some of the macros,
like
.BR ALN ,
.BR LNS ,
and
.BR LNE ,
are integrated only with the
.MR groff_ms @MAN7EXT@
package.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Files
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I @MACRODIR@/\:www\:.tmac
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Authors
.\" ====================================================================
.
The
.I www
macro package
was written by
.MT gaius@\:glam\:.ac\:.uk
Gaius Mulley
.ME ,
with additions by
.MT wl@\:gnu\:.org
Werner Lemberg
.ME
and
.MT groff\-bernd\:.warken\-72@\:web\:.de
Bernd Warken
.ME .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR grohtml @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR netpbm 1
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_groff_www_7_man_C]
.do rr *groff_groff_www_7_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
