'\" t
.TH groff_me @MAN7EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
groff_me \- \(lqme\(rq macro package for formatting documents with GNU \
roff
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1980, 1993
.\"   The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\" 3. [Deleted.  See
.\"     ftp://ftp.cs.berkeley.edu/pub/4bsd/README.Impt.License.Change]
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
.\" PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR
.\" CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
.\" USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
.\" ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)me.7	8.1 (Berkeley) 06/05/93
.\"
.\" Modified for groff by jjc@jclark.com
.\" Changed to use TBL and eliminate low-level troff hackery by ESR
.\" (this enables it to be lifted to structural markup).
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_groff_me_7_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY "groff \-me"
.RI [ option\~ .\|.\|.\&]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.
.SY "groff \-m me"
.RI [ option\~ .\|.\|.\&]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
The GNU implementation of the
.I me
macro package is part of the
.I groff
document formatting system.
.
The
.I me
package of macro definitions for the
.I roff
language provides a convenient facility for preparing technical papers
in various formats.
.
This version is based on the
.I me
distributed with 4.4BSD and can be used with the GNU
.I troff
formatter as well as those descended from AT&T
.IR troff .
.
.
.P
Many
.I roff
requests are unsafe in conjunction with this package; however, the
following requests may be used with impunity after the first
.B pp
macro call.
.
.TS
l l.
\fB.bp\fP	begin new page
\fB.br\fP	break output line here
\fB.sp\fP \fIn\fP	insert \fIn\fP spacing lines
\fB.ls\fP \fIn\fP	(line spacing) \fIn\fP=1 single, \fIn\fP=2 double
\fB.na\fP	no alignment of right margin
\fB.ce\fP \fIn\fP	center next \fIn\fP lines
\fB.ul\fP \fIn\fP	underline next \fIn\fP lines
.TE
.
.
.P
.I Note:
In contrast to its behavior with other macro packages and \(lqraw\(rq
.IR roff ,
when using the
.I me
package,
the
.B .sp
request
(redefined by
.I me
as a macro)
will
.I not
put space at the top of a page.
.
.
.P
Output of the
.IR grn ,
.IR pic ,
.IR eqn ,
.IR refer ,
and
.I tbl
preprocessors
is acceptable as input.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Macro reference"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Numeric arguments to macros are denoted with lowercase letters and
string arguments with uppercase.
.
An optional macro argument such as
.I x
appears in brackets,
.BI [ x ].
.
Arguments to macros generally must be quoted if they contain spaces or
tabs.
.
An exception is the argument to header and footer macros,
which require some explanation.
.
They take the form
.RI \(lq c
.I left c middle c right
.IR c \(rq,
with spaces added here for clarity.
.
The strings
.IR left ,
.IR middle ,
and
.I right
correspond to their page placement and can contain unprotected
spaces and/or tabs,
but must not contain the (non-space) character
.IR c ,
which delimits them.
.
For brevity,
the table presents header and footer arguments as
.IR clcmcrc .
.
Popular choices for
.I c
are the neutral apostrophe
.RB \(lq \(aq \(rq
and the neutral double quote
.RB \(lq \(dq \(rq.
.
.
.P
This list is incomplete;
some requests are too complex to summarize in a table,
and some that are listed below accept additional arguments not shown.
.
See the \[lq]\-me Reference Manual\[rq] for further details.
.
.
.P
.TS
lB lB lB lBx
lB lB lB lBx
lB l l lx.
Macro	Initial	Causes	Explanation
\^	Value	Break	\^
_
\&.(c	\-	yes	T{
Begin centered block.
T}
\&.(d	\-	no	T{
Begin delayed text.
T}
\&.(f	\-	no	T{
Begin footnote.
T}
\&.(l	\-	yes	Begin list.
\&.(q	\-	yes	T{
Begin major quote.
T}
\&.(x \fR[\fIX\fP]	\-	no	T{
Begin item in index (named
.IR X ).
T}
\&.(z	\-	no	T{
Begin floating keep.
T}
\&.)c	\-	yes	T{
End centered block.
T}
\&.)d	\-	yes	T{
End delayed text.
T}
\&.)f	\-	yes	T{
End footnote.
T}
\&.)l	\-	yes	End list.
\&.)q	\-	yes	T{
End major quote.
T}
\&.)x	\-	yes	T{
End index item.
T}
\&.)z	\-	yes	T{
End floating keep.
T}
\&.++ \fIM\fP \fR[\fIclcmcrc\fP]	\-	no	T{
Define paper section as
.IR M ,
which must be one of
.B C
(chapter),
.B A
(appendix),
.B P
(preliminary, i.e., front matter or table of contents),
.B AB
(abstract),
.B B
(bibliography),
.B RC
(chapters renumbered from page one each chapter),
or
.B RA
(appendix renumbered from page one)
(and set page header to
.IR clcmcrc ).
T}
\&.+c \fR[\fIT\fP]	\-	yes	T{
Begin chapter (or appendix, etc., as set by
.BR .++ )
(with title
.IR T ).
T}
\&.1c	1	yes	T{
One-column format on a new page.
T}
\&.2c	1	yes	T{
Two-column format.
T}
\&.EN	\-	yes	T{
Space after equation
produced by
.I eqn
or
.IR neqn .
T}
\&.EQ \fR[\fIM\fP [\fIT\fP]]	\-	yes	T{
Begin displayed equation (with indentation
.IR M ,
which must be one of
.B C
(centered, default),
.B I
(indented),
or
.B L
(justified left) (and title
.I T
in right margin)).
T}
\&.GE	\-	yes	T{
End \fIgrn\fP picture,
leaving the current position at the bottom of the picture.
T}
\&.GF	\-	yes	T{
End \fIgrn\fP picture,
leaving the current position at the top of the picture.
T}
\&.GS	\-	yes	T{
Begin \fIgrn\fP picture.
T}
\&.IE	\-	yes	T{
End \fIideal\fP picture,
leaving the current position at the bottom of the picture.
T}
\&.IF	\-	yes	T{
End \fIideal\fP picture,
leaving the current position at the top of the picture.
T}
\&.IS	\-	yes	T{
Begin \fIideal\fP picture.
T}
\&.PE	\-	yes	T{
End \fIpic\fP picture,
leaving the current position at the bottom of the picture.
T}
\&.PF	\-	yes	T{
End \fIpic\fP picture,
leaving the current position at the top of the picture.
T}
\&.PS	\-	yes	T{
Begin \fIpic\fP picture.
T}
\&.TE	\-	yes	T{
End
.I tbl
table.
T}
\&.TH	\-	yes	T{
End heading of
.I tbl
table.
T}
\&.TS \fR[\fBH\fP]	\-	yes	T{
Begin
.I tbl
table; if
.BR H ,
table repeats heading on each page.
T}
\&.b \fR[\fIX\fP [\fIY\fP]]	\-	no	T{
Print
.I X
in bold (appending
.I Y
in the previous font); if no arguments, switch to bold.
T}
\&.ba \fIn\fP	0	yes	T{
Augment the base indent (for regular text, like paragraphs)
by
.IR n .
T}
\&.bc	\-	yes	T{
Begin new column.
T}
\&.bi \fR[\fIX\fP [\fIY\fP]]	\-	no	T{
Print
.I X
in bold italics (appending
.I Y
in the previous font); if no arguments, switch to bold italics.
T}
\&.bu	\-	yes	T{
Begin bulleted paragraph.
T}
\&.bx \fR[\fIX\fP [\fIY\fP]]	\-	no	T{
Print \fIX\fP in a box (with Y appended).
Renders reliably only if filling disabled.
T}
\&.ef \fIclcmcrc\fP	""""	no	T{
Set even-numbered page footer.
T}
\&.eh \fIclcmcrc\fP	""""	no	T{
Set even-numbered page header.
T}
\&.fo \fIclcmcrc\fP	""""	no	T{
Set page footer.
T}
\&.hx	\-	no	T{
Suppress headers and footers on next page.
T}
\&.he \fIclcmcrc\fP	""""	no	T{
Set page header.
T}
\&.hl	\-	yes	T{
Draw a horizontal line.
T}
\&.i \fR[\fIX\fP [\fIY\fP]]	\-	no	T{
Print
.I X
in italics (appending
.I Y
in the previous font); if no arguments, switch to italics.
T}
\&.ip \fR[\fIX\fP [\fIn\fP]]	\fIn\fP=5n	yes	T{
Start indented paragraph (with hanging tag
.I X
(and indentation
.IR n )).
T}
\&.lp	\-	yes	T{
Begin paragraph with first line flush left.
T}
\&.n1	\-	no	T{
Number lines from one,
in margin,
on each page.
T}
\&.n2 \fR[\fIN\fP]	\-	no	T{
Number lines from \fIN\fP,
in margin.
.
Stop numbering if \fIN\fP missing;
resume where stopped with number \fIN\fP if unsigned,
or resume with number incremented by \(+-\fIN\fP.
T}
\&.np	1	yes	T{
Start numbered paragraph.
T}
\&.of \fIclcmcrc\fP	""""	no	T{
Set odd-numbered page footer.
T}
\&.oh \fIclcmcrc\fP	""""	no	T{
Set odd-numbered page header.
T}
\&.pd	\-	yes	T{
Print delayed text.
T}
\&.pp	\-	yes	T{
Begin paragraph with indented first line.
T}
\&.r \fR[\fIX\fP [\fIY\fP]]	\-	no	T{
Print
.I X
in roman (appending
.I Y
in the previous font); if no arguments, switch to roman.
T}
\&.re	0.5i	no	T{
Reset tabs to default values.
T}
\&.sh \fR[\fIn\fP [\fIT\fP]]	\fIn\fP=1	yes	T{
Start numbered section; print section number (set to
.I n
(and title
.IR T ))
in bold.
T}
\&.sk	\-	no	T{
Leave the next page blank.
Only one page is remembered ahead.
T}
\&.sm \fIX\fP \fR[\fIY\fP]	\-	no	T{
Print
.I X
in a smaller point size (appending
.I Y
at the previous size).
T}
\&.sz \fIn\fP	10p	no	T{
Augment the point size by
.I n
points.
T}
\&.tp	\-	yes	T{
Begin title page.
T}
\&.u \fIX\fP \fR[\fIY\fP]	\-	no	T{
Underline
.I X
(appending
.I Y
without underlining).
Renders reliably only if filling disabled.
T}
\&.uh \fR[\fIT\fP]	\-	yes	T{
Start unnumbered section (and print title
.I T
in bold).
T}
\&.xp \fR[\fIX\fP]	\-	no	T{
Print index (named
.IR X ).
T}
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Files
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I @MACRODIR@/me.tmac
(a wrapper file for
.IR e.tmac )
.br
.I @MACRODIR@/e.tmac
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Notes
.\" ====================================================================
.
Early
.I roff
macro packages limited themselves to a single-letter namespace
.RI ( mm ,
.IR ms ,
.IR mv ,
.IR mn ,
and so on).
.
.\" 'When I started writing the -me macros it began as something in my
.\" private tree (I don't remember what I called it).  Then some other
.\" folks on the INGRES project wanted to use it, but our system admin
.\" at the time didn't want to dicker with the system namespace at the
.\" behest of a mere undergraduate, so he didn't like anything that was
.\" actually descriptive lest people think it was "official".  He
.\" finally consented to "-meric" (which I always hated), since it was
.\" obviously non-official.  By the time my macros became popular around
.\" Berkeley it got shortened to "-me", much to my relief.
.\"
.\" Of course, if AT&T had been willing to let Berkeley have -ms then
.\" most likely -me would never have happened at all.  Without a macro
.\" package, nroff/troff is basically unusable; -me stepped into the
.\" vacuum.' -- Eric Allman
.\"
.\" https://minnie.tuhs.org/pipermail/tuhs/2018-November/017033.html
.
The \(lqe\(rq in \(lqme\(rq stands for \(lqEric P.\& Allman\(rq,
who wrote the macro package and the original technical papers
documenting it while an undergraduate at the University of California.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.
Two manuals are available in source and rendered form.
.
On your system,
they may be compressed and/or available in additional formats.
.
.
.TP
.I @DOCDIR@/meintro.me
.TQ
.I @DOCDIR@/meintro.ps
is
\[lq]Writing Papers with
.I Groff
Using
.RI \- me \[rq],
by Eric P.\& Allman and James Clark.
.
.
.TP
.I @DOCDIR@/meref.me
.TQ
.I @DOCDIR@/meref.ps
is the
.RI \[lq]\- me
Reference Manual\[rq],
by Eric P.\& Allman and James Clark.
.
.
.P
.IR "Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff" ,
by Trent A.\& Fisher and Werner Lemberg,
is the primary
.I groff
manual.
.
You can browse it interactively with \[lq]info groff\[rq].
.
.
.P
For preprocessors supported by
.IR me ,
see
.IR \%@g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@),
.IR \%@g@grn (@MAN1EXT@),
.IR \%@g@pic (@MAN1EXT@),
.IR \%@g@refer (@MAN1EXT@),
and
.IR \%@g@tbl (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.
.P
.IR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.IR \%@g@troff (@MAN1EXT@)
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_groff_me_7_man_C]
.do rr *groff_groff_me_7_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" tab-with: 20
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff tabstop=20 textwidth=72:
