    Copyright 2003-2022 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

    Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
    are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
    notice and this notice are preserved.

LICENSES
--------

groff is a free software project.  It is licensed under the GNU General
Public License (GPL), version 3 or later.

The file COPYING in the top directory of the groff source distribution
contains a copy of the GPL that was downloaded from the GNU web site
<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.txt> on 3 January 2009.

All files in the groff source distribution are distributed under the
terms of this version of the GPL.  You are free to choose version 3 or
any subsequent version of the GPL.  Some are distributed under
alternative terms as well.

The text of the GPL contains a postal address from which you can obtain
the current version of the license.  Further information is available on
the Web at <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft>.

groff is an effort of the GNU Project of the Free Software Foundation
(FSF); with the exceptions noted below, the copyrights of all files
comprising it have been assigned to the FSF.  Information on GNU and the
FSF may be found at <http://www.fsf.org/>.

Files in the contrib/ subdirectory of the source distribution are not
strictly part of groff.  That is, they are distributed with it and are
Free Software <https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html>, but they
are not considered essential parts of the distribution.  Further, they
may bear licenses other than the GPL or the FSF does not administer
their copyrights.  To determine their copyright status and licensing,
see the "COPYRIGHT" file in the appropriate subdirectory of contrib/.

Some files are part of groff but bear licenses in addition to the GPL,
or have been placed into the public domain.  This is because they
originated elsewhere; often, the groff project has modified them,
sometimes extensively.  These multi-licensed groff components are as
follows.  Their file names are not always identical to those in their
original distributions, but we have kept them similar.

grn preprocessor
================

grn, written by Barry Roitblat <barry@rentonww.com> and David
Slattengren <slatteng@Xinet.COM>, was part of the Berkeley
device-independent troff distribution.  The files contain no AT&T code
and are in the public domain.  Historically, the original package could
be found at <http://ftp.cs.wisc.edu/pub/misc/grn.tar.Z>.

	src/preproc/grn/gprint.h
	src/preproc/grn/hdb.cpp
	src/preproc/grn/hgraph.cpp
	src/preproc/grn/hpoint.cpp
	src/preproc/grn/main.cpp

gxditview output driver
=======================

gxditview is based on the X Window System (Version 11)'s "xditview"
program, and is licensed under the same terms as the rest of X11R5.

	src/devices/xditview/DESC.in
	src/devices/xditview/Dvi.c
	src/devices/xditview/Dvi.h
	src/devices/xditview/DviP.h
	src/devices/xditview/FontMap-X11
	src/devices/xditview/GXditview.ad
	src/devices/xditview/Menu.h
	src/devices/xditview/ad2c
	src/devices/xditview/device.c
	src/devices/xditview/device.h
	src/devices/xditview/draw.c
	src/devices/xditview/font.c
	src/devices/xditview/gray1.bm
	src/devices/xditview/gray2.bm
	src/devices/xditview/gray3.bm
	src/devices/xditview/gray4.bm
	src/devices/xditview/gray5.bm
	src/devices/xditview/gray6.bm
	src/devices/xditview/gray7.bm
	src/devices/xditview/gray8.bm
	src/devices/xditview/gxditview.man
	src/devices/xditview/lex.c
	src/devices/xditview/page.c
	src/devices/xditview/parse.c
	src/devices/xditview/xdit.bm
	src/devices/xditview/xdit_mask.bm
	src/devices/xditview/xditview.c

	src/include/DviChar.h
	src/include/XFontName.h

	src/libs/libxutil/DviChar.c
	src/libs/libxutil/XFontName.c

mdoc macro package
==================

mdoc uses the BSD "three-clause" license; that is, it is subject to the
advertising clause rescission.

	tmac/doc.tmac
	tmac/doc-old.tmac
	tmac/mdoc/doc-common
	tmac/mdoc/doc-ditroff
	tmac/mdoc/doc-nroff
	tmac/mdoc/doc-syms
	tmac/groff_mdoc.7.man

me macro package
================

"me" uses the BSD "three-clause" license; that is, it is subject to the
advertising clause rescission.

	tmac/e.tmac
	tmac/groff_me.man
	doc/meintro.me
	doc/meintro_fr.me
	doc/meref.me

Hyphenation patterns
====================

groff's hyphenation pattern files are adapted from those used by various
TeX-related projects.

* "tmac/hyphen.cs" is renamed from "czhyphen.tex", and obtained from
  <http://dante.ctan.org/CTAN/macros/cstex/base/csplain.tar.gz>.

  It is under the GNU General Public License, version 2 or later.

* "tmac/hyphen.den" and "tmac/hyphen.det" are renamed from
  "dehyphn-x-2017-03-31.pat" and "dehypht-x-2017-03-31.pat",
  respectively, in the "dehyph-exptl-0.41" package.

  Copyright (c) 2013-2017
  Stephan Hennig, Werner Lemberg, Guenter Milde, Sander van Geloven,
  Georg Pfeiffer, Gisbert W. Selke, Tobias Wendorf

  Licensed under the MIT license. Full license text available from

    http://opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php

* "tmac/hyphen.en" is renamed from "hyph-en-us.tex" in the "hyph-utf8"
  CTAN package.

  Copyright (C) 1990, 2004, 2005 Gerard D.C. Kuiken

  Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
  are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
  notice and this notice are preserved.

* "tmac/hyphen.fr" is renamed from "frhyph.tex", obtained from
  <http://dante.ctan.org/CTAN/language/hyphenation/frhyph.tex>.

  It identifies no copyright holder but bears a license statement.

  This file is available for free and can used and redistributed
  asis for free. Modified versions should have another name.

* "tmac/hyphen.it" is renamed from "hyph-it.tex" in the "hyph-utf8" CTAN
  package.

  Copyright (C) 2008-2011 Claudio Beccari

  This file is available under any of the following licences:

  name: LPPL
  version: 1.3
  or_later: true
  url: http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt
  status: maintained
  maintainer: Claudio Beccari, e-mail claudio dot beccari at gmail dot
  com

  name: MIT
  url: https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
  text: >
      Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
      obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation
      files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without
      restriction, including without limitation the rights to use,
      copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
      copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
      Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following
      conditions:

      The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
      included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

      THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
      EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES
      OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
      NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
      HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY,
      WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
      FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
      OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

* "tmac/hyphen.sv" is renamed from "svhyph.tex", obtained from
  <http://dante.ctan.org/CTAN/language/hyphenation/svhyph.tex>.

  Copyright 1994 by Jan Michael Rynning. All rights reserved.

  This program may be distributed and/or modified under the conditions
  of the LaTeX Project Public License, either version 1.2 of this
  license or (at your option) any later version.  The latest version of
  this license is in http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt and version
  1.2 or later is part of all distributions of LaTeX version 1999/12/01
  or later.

Any omissions from the above list are unintentional; please contact the
groff development mailing list at groff@gnu.org to point them out.
