.TH @g@neqn @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
@g@neqn \- format equations for character-cell terminal output
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
.\" a permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for
.\" modified versions, except that this permission notice may be
.\" included in translations approved by the Free Software Foundation
.\" instead of in the original English.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_neqn_1_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.\" Define fallback for groff 1.23's MR macro if the system lacks it.
.nr do-fallback 0
.if !\n(.f           .nr do-fallback 1 \" mandoc
.if  \n(.g .if !d MR .nr do-fallback 1 \" older groff
.if !\n(.g           .nr do-fallback 1 \" non-groff *roff
.if \n[do-fallback]  \{\
.  de MR
.    ie \\n(.$=1 \
.      I \%\\$1
.    el \
.      IR \%\\$1 (\\$2)\\$3
.  .
.\}
.rr do-fallback
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY @g@neqn
.RI [ @g@eqn-argument \~.\|.\|.]
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I @g@neqn
invokes the
.MR @g@eqn @MAN1EXT@
command with the
.B ascii
output device.
.
.
.LP
.I @g@eqn
does not support low-resolution,
typewriter-like devices,
although it may work adequately for very simple input.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.MR @g@eqn @MAN1EXT@
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_neqn_1_man_C]
.do rr *groff_neqn_1_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=nroff textwidth=72:
