.TH grops @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
grops \- groff output driver for PostScript
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2018, 2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
.\" a permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for
.\" modified versions, except that this permission notice may be
.\" included in translations approved by the Free Software Foundation
.\" instead of in the original English.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_grops_1_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.
.\" This macro definition is poor style from a portability standpoint,
.\" but it's a good test and demonstration of the standard font
.\" repertoire for the devices where it has any effect at all, and so
.\" should be retained.
.de FT
.  if '\\*(.T'ps' .ft \\$1
.  if '\\*(.T'pdf' .ft \\$1
..
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY grops
.RB [ \-glm ]
.RB [ \-b\~\c
.IR  n ]
.RB [ \-c\~\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ \-F\~\c
.IR dir ]
.RB [ \-I\~\c
.IR dir ]
.RB [ \-p\~\c
.IR papersize ]
.RB [ \-P\~\c
.IR prologue ]
.RB [ \-w\~\c
.IR n ]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.YS
.
.
.SY grops
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.
.SY grops
.B \-v
.
.SY grops
.B \-\-version
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
.B grops
translates the output of GNU
.B troff
to PostScript.
.
Normally
.B grops
should be invoked by using the groff command with a
.B \-Tps
option.
.
.if '@DEVICE@'ps' (Actually, this is the default for groff.)
.
If no files are given,
.B grops
reads the standard input.
.
A filename of
.B \-
also causes
.B grops
to read the standard input.
.
PostScript output is written to the standard output.
.
When
.B grops
is run by
.B groff
options can be passed to
.B grops
using
.BR groff 's
.B \-P
option.
.
.
.LP
Note that
.B grops
doesn't produce a valid document structure (conforming to the
Document Structuring Convention) if called with multiple file
arguments.
.
To print such concatenated output it is necessary to deactivate DSC
handling in the printing program or previewer.
.
See section \[lq]Font Installation\[rq] below for a guide how to install
fonts for
.BR grops .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Options
.\" ====================================================================
.
.B \-\-help
displays a usage message,
while
.B \-v
and
.B \-\-version
show version information;
all exit afterward.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-b n
Provide workarounds for older printers, broken spoolers, and previewers.
.
Normally
.B grops
produces output at PostScript LanguageLevel\~2 that conforms to the
Document Structuring Conventions version 3.0.
.
Some older printers, spoolers, and previewers can't handle such
output.
.
The value of\~\c
.I n
controls what
.B grops
does to make its output acceptable to such programs.
.
A value of\~0 causes grops not to employ any workarounds.
.
.IP
Add\~1 if no
.B %%Begin\%Document\%Setup
and
.B %%End\%Document\%Setup
comments should be generated;
this is needed for early versions of TranScript that get confused by
anything between the
.B %%End\%Prolog
comment and the first
.B %%Page
comment.
.
.IP
Add\~2 if lines in included files beginning with
.B %!\&
should be stripped out; this is needed for Sun's pageview
previewer.
.
.IP
Add\~4 if
.BR %%Page ,
.B %%Trailer
and
.B %%End\%Prolog
comments should be
stripped out of included files; this is needed for spoolers that
don't understand the
.B %%Begin\%Document
and
.B %%End\%Document
comments.
.
.IP
Add\~8 if the first line of the PostScript output should be
.B %!PS-Adobe-2.0
rather than
.BR %!PS-Adobe-3.0 ;
this is needed when using Sun's Newsprint with a printer that
requires page reversal.
.
.IP
Add\~16 if no media size information should be included in the
document (that is, neither use
.B %%Document\%Media
nor the
.B setpagedevice
PostScript command).
.
This was the behaviour of groff version 1.18.1 and earlier; it is
needed for older printers which don't understand PostScript
LanguageLevel\~2.
.
It is also necessary if the output is further processed to get an
encapsulated PS (EPS) file \[en] see below.
.
.IP
The default value can be specified by a
.
.RS
.IP
.BI broken\  n
.
.LP
command in the
.I DESC
file.
.
Otherwise the default value is\~0.
.RE
.
.TP
.BI \-c n
Print
.I n
copies of each page.
.
.TP
.BI \-F dir
Prepend directory
.RI dir /dev name
to the search path for prologue, font, and device description files;
.I name
is the name of the device, usually
.BR ps .
.
.TP
.B \-g
Guess the page length.
.
This generates PostScript code that guesses the page length.
.
The guess is correct only if the imageable area is vertically
centered on the page.
.
This option allows you to generate documents that can be printed
both on letter (8.5\[mu]11) paper and on A4 paper without change.
.
.TP
.BI \-I dir
This option may be used to add a directory to the search path for
files on the command line and files named in
.B \[rs]X\[aq]ps: \%import\[aq]
and
.B \[rs]X\[aq]ps: file\[aq]
escapes.
.
The search path is initialized with the current directory.
.
This option may be specified more than once; the directories are then
searched in the order specified (but before the current directory).
.
If you want to make the current directory be read before other
directories,
add
.B \-I.\&
at the appropriate place.
.
.IP
No directory search is performed for files with an absolute file name.
.
.TP
.B \-l
Print the document in landscape format.
.
.TP
.B \-m
Turn manual feed on for the document.
.
.TP
.BI \-p paper-size
Set physical dimension of output medium.
.
This overrides the
.BR papersize ,
.BR paperlength ,
and
.B paperwidth
commands in the
.I DESC
file; it accepts the same arguments as the
.B papersize
command.
.
See
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@
for details.
.
.TP
.BI \-P prologue-file
Use the file
.I prologue-file
(in the font path) as the prologue instead of the default prologue file
.BR prologue .
.
This option overrides the environment variable
.I GROPS_PROLOGUE.
.
.TP
.BI \-w n
Lines should be drawn using a thickness of
.IR n \~\c
thousandths of an em.
.
If this option is not given, the line thickness defaults to 0.04\~em.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Usage
.\" ====================================================================
.
The input to
.B grops
must be in the format output by
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ .
.
This is described in
.MR groff_out @MAN5EXT@ .
.
.LP
In addition, the device and font description files for the device used
must meet certain requirements:
.
The resolution must be an integer multiple of\~72 times the
.BR sizescale .
.
The
.B ps
device uses a resolution of 72000 and a sizescale of 1000.
.
.
.LP
The device description file must contain a valid paper size; see
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@
for more information.
.
.
.LP
Each font description file must contain a command
.IP
.BI internalname\~ psname
.LP
which says that the PostScript name of the font is
.IR psname .
.
It may also contain a command
.IP
.BI encoding\~ enc-file
.LP
which says that
the PostScript font should be reencoded using the encoding described in
.IR enc-file ;
this file should consist of a sequence of lines of the form:
.
.
.IP
.I
pschar code
.
.
.LP
where
.I pschar
is the PostScript name of the character,
and
.I code
is its position in the encoding expressed as a decimal integer; valid
values are in the range 0 to\~255.
.
Lines starting with
.B #
and blank lines are ignored.
.
The code for each character given in the font description file must
correspond to the code for the character in encoding file,
or to the code in the default encoding for the font if the PostScript
font is not to be reencoded.
.
This code can be used with the
.B \[rs]N
escape sequence in
.I \%@g@troff
to select the character,
even if the character does not have a
.I groff
glyph name.
.
Every character in the font descripiton file must exist in the
PostScript font,
and the widths given in the font descripiton file must match the widths
used in the PostScript font.
.
.I grops
assumes that a character with a
.I groff
name of
.B space
is blank
(makes no marks on the page);
it can make use of such a character to generate more efficient and
compact PostScript output.
.
.
.LP
.I grops
is able to display all glyphs in a PostScript font;
it is not limited to 256 of them.
.
.I enc-file
(or the default encoding if no encoding file specified)
just defines the
order of glyphs for the first 256 characters;
all other glyphs are accessed with additional encoding vectors which
.I grops
produces on the fly.
.
.
.LP
.B grops
can automatically include the downloadable fonts necessary
to print the document.
.
Such fonts must be in PFA format.
.
Use
.MR pfbtops @MAN1EXT@
to convert a Type\~1 font in PFB format.
.
Any downloadable fonts which should, when required, be included by
.B grops
must be listed in the file
.IR @FONTDIR@/devps/download ;
this should consist of lines of the form
.
.IP
.I
font file
.
.
.LP
where
.I font
is the PostScript name of the font,
and
.I file
is the name of the file containing the font;
lines beginning with
.B #
and blank lines are ignored;
fields may be separated by tabs or spaces;
.I file
is sought for using the same mechanism as that for
.I groff
font description files.
.
The
.I download
file itself is also sought using this mechanism;
currently,
only the matching file found in the device and font description search
path is used.
.
.
.LP
If the file containing a downloadable font or imported document
conforms to the Adobe Document Structuring Conventions,
then
.B grops
interprets any comments in the files sufficiently to ensure that its
own output is conforming.
.
It also supplies any needed font resources that are listed in the
.I download
file
as well as any needed file resources.
.
It is also able to handle inter-resource dependencies.
.
For example, suppose that you have a downloadable font called
Garamond, and also a downloadable font called Garamond-Outline which
depends on Garamond (typically it would be defined to copy
Garamond's font dictionary, and change the PaintType), then it is
necessary for Garamond to appear before Garamond-Outline in the
PostScript document.
.
.B grops
handles this automatically provided that the downloadable font file
for Garamond-Outline indicates its dependence on Garamond by means of
the Document Structuring Conventions, for example by beginning with
the following lines
.
.IP
.B
%!PS-Adobe-3.0 Resource-Font
.br
.B
%%DocumentNeededResources: font Garamond
.br
.B
%%EndComments
.br
.B
%%IncludeResource: font Garamond
.
.
.LP
In this case both Garamond and Garamond-Outline would need to be listed
in the
.I download
file.
.
A downloadable font should not include its own name in a
.B %%Document\%Supplied\%Resources
comment.
.
.
.LP
.B grops
does not interpret
.B %%Document\%Fonts
comments.
.
The
.BR %%Document\%Needed\%Resources ,
.BR %%Document\%Supplied\%Resources ,
.BR %%Include\%Resource ,
.BR %%Begin\%Resource ,
and
.B %%End\%Resource
comments
(or possibly the old
.BR %%Document\%Needed\%Fonts ,
.BR %%Document\%Supplied\%Fonts ,
.BR %%Include\%Font ,
.BR %%Begin\%Font ,
and
.B %%End\%Font
comments)
should be used.
.
.
.LP
In the default setup
there are styles called
.BR R ,
.BR I ,
.BR B ,
and
.B BI
mounted at font positions 1 to\~4.
.
The fonts are grouped into families
.BR A ,
.BR BM ,
.BR C ,
.BR H ,
.BR HN ,
.BR N ,
.BR P ,
and\~\c
.B T
having members in each of these styles:
.
.RS
.TP
.B AR
.FT AR
AvantGarde-Book
.FT
.
.TQ
.B AI
.FT AI
AvantGarde-BookOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B AB
.FT AB
AvantGarde-Demi
.FT
.
.TQ
.B ABI
.FT ABI
AvantGarde-DemiOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMR
.FT BMR
Bookman-Light
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMI
.FT BMI
Bookman-LightItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMB
.FT BMB
Bookman-Demi
.FT
.
.TQ
.B BMBI
.FT BMBI
Bookman-DemiItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CR
.FT CR
Courier
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CI
.FT CI
Courier-Oblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CB
.FT CB
Courier-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B CBI
.FT CBI
Courier-BoldOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HR
.FT HR
Helvetica
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HI
.FT HI
Helvetica-Oblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HB
.FT HB
Helvetica-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HBI
.FT HBI
Helvetica-BoldOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNR
.FT HNR
Helvetica-Narrow
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNI
.FT HNI
Helvetica-Narrow-Oblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNB
.FT HNB
Helvetica-Narrow-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B HNBI
.FT HNBI
Helvetica-Narrow-BoldOblique
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NR
.FT NR
NewCenturySchlbk-Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NI
.FT NI
NewCenturySchlbk-Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NB
.FT NB
NewCenturySchlbk-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B NBI
.FT NBI
NewCenturySchlbk-BoldItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PR
.FT PR
Palatino-Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PI
.FT PI
Palatino-Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PB
.FT PB
Palatino-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B PBI
.FT PBI
Palatino-BoldItalic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TR
.FT TR
Times-Roman
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TI
.FT TI
Times-Italic
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TB
.FT TB
Times-Bold
.FT
.
.TQ
.B TBI
.FT TBI
Times-BoldItalic
.FT
.RE
.
.
.LP
There is also the following font which is not a member of a family:
.
.RS
.TP
.B ZCMI
.FT ZCMI
ZapfChancery-MediumItalic
.FT
.RE
.
.
.LP
There are also some special fonts called
.B S
for the PS Symbol font, and
.BR SS ,
containing slanted lowercase Greek letters taken from PS Symbol.
.
Zapf Dingbats is available as
.BR ZD ,
and a reversed version of ZapfDingbats
(with symbols pointing in the opposite direction)
is available as
.BR ZDR ;
most characters in these fonts are unnamed and must be accessed using
.BR \[rs]N .
.
.
.LP
The default color for
.B \[rs]m
and
.B \[rs]M
is black; for colors defined in the \[oq]rgb\[cq] color space
.B setrgbcolor
is used, for \[oq]cmy\[cq] and \[oq]cmyk\[cq]
.BR setcmykcolor ,
and for \[oq]gray\[cq]
.BR setgray .
.
.B setcmykcolor
is a PostScript LanguageLevel\~2 command and thus not available on some
older printers.
.
.
.LP
.B grops
understands various X\~commands produced using the
.B \[rs]X
escape sequence;
.B grops
only interprets commands that begin with a
.B ps:
tag.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]ps: exec\~" code \[aq]
This executes the arbitrary PostScript commands in
.IR code .
.
The PostScript currentpoint is set to the position of the
.B \[rs]X
command before executing
.IR code .
.
The origin is at the top left corner of the page,
.IR x \~coordinates
increase to the right,
and
.IR y \~coordinates
down the page.
.
A procedure\~\c
.B u
is defined that converts
.I groff
basic units to the coordinate system in effect
(provided the user doesn't change the scale).
.
For example,
.
.RS
.IP
.EX
\&.nr x 1i
\[rs]X\[aq]ps: exec \[rs]nx u 0 rlineto stroke\[aq]
.EE
.RE
.
.IP
draws a horizontal line one inch long.
.
.I code
may make changes to the graphics state,
but any changes persist only to the end of the page.
.
A dictionary containing the definitions specified by the
.B def
and
.B mdef
is on top of the dictionary stack.
.
If your code adds definitions to this dictionary,
you should allocate space for them using
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]ps mdef\~" n \[aq]\c
\&.
.
.
Any definitions persist only until the end of the page.
.
If you use the
.B \[rs]Y
escape sequence with an argument that names a macro,
.I code
can extend over multiple lines.
.
For example,
.
.
.RS
.IP
.EX
\&.nr x 1i
\&.de y
\&ps: exec
\&\[rs]nx u 0 rlineto
\&stroke
\&..
\&\[rs]Yy
.EE
.
.
.LP
is another way to draw a horizontal line one inch long.
.
The single backslash before
.RB \[lq] nx \[rq]\[em]the
only reason to use a register while defining the macro
.RB \[lq] y \[rq]\[em]is
to convert a user-specified dimension
.RB \[lq] 1i \[rq]
to
.I groff
basic units which are in turn converted to PostScript units with the
.B u
procedure.
.
.
.LP
.B grops
wraps user-specified PostScript code into a dictionary, nothing more.
.
In particular, it doesn't start and end the inserted code with
.B save
and
.BR restore ,
respectively.
.
This must be supplied by the user, if necessary.
.
.RE
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]ps: file\~" name \[aq]
This is the same as the
.B exec
command except that the PostScript code is read from file
.IR name .
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]ps: def\~" code \[aq]
Place a PostScript definition contained in
.I code
in the prologue.
.
There should be at most one definition per
.B \[rs]X
command.
.
Long definitions can be split over several
.B \[rs]X
commands;
all the
.I code
arguments are simply joined together separated by newlines.
.
The definitions are placed in a dictionary which is automatically
pushed on the dictionary stack when an
.B exec
command is executed.
.
If you use the
.B \[rs]Y
escape sequence with an argument that names a macro,
.I code
can extend over multiple lines.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]ps: mdef\~" "n code" \[aq]
Like
.BR def ,
except that
.I code
may contain up to
.IR n \~\c
definitions.
.
.B grops
needs to know how many definitions
.I code
contains
so that it can create an appropriately sized PostScript dictionary
to contain them.
.
.TP
.BI "\[rs]X\[aq]ps: import\~" "file llx lly urx ury width\~"\c
.RI [ height ]\c
.B \[aq]
Import a PostScript graphic from
.IR file .
.
The arguments
.IR llx ,
.IR lly ,
.IR urx ,
and
.I ury
give the bounding box of the graphic in the default PostScript
coordinate system.
.
They should all be integers:
.I llx
and
.I lly
are the
.I x
and
.IR y \~coordinates
of the lower left corner of the graphic;
.I urx
and
.I ury
are the
.I x
and
.IR y \~coordinates
of the upper right corner of the graphic;
.I width
and
.I height
are integers that give the desired width and height in
.I groff
basic units of the graphic.
.
.IP
The graphic is scaled so that it has this width and height
and translated so that the lower left corner of the graphic is
located at the position associated with
.B \[rs]X
command.
.
If the height argument is omitted it is scaled uniformly in the
.I x
and
.IR y \~axes
so that it has the specified width.
.
.
.IP
The contents of the
.B \[rs]X
command are not interpreted by
.BR troff ;
so vertical space for the graphic is not automatically added,
and the
.I width
and
.I height
arguments are not allowed to have attached scaling indicators.
.
.IP
If the PostScript file complies with the Adobe Document Structuring
Conventions and contains a
.B %%Bounding\%Box
comment, then the bounding box can be automatically
extracted from within groff by using the
.B psbb
request.
.
.IP
See
.MR groff_tmac @MAN5EXT@
for a description of the
.B PSPIC
macro which provides a convenient high-level interface for inclusion of
PostScript graphics.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]X\[aq]ps: invis\[aq]
.TQ
.B \[rs]X\[aq]ps: endinvis\[aq]
No output is generated for text and drawing commands
that are bracketed with these
.B \[rs]X
commands.
.
These commands are intended for use when output from
.B troff
is previewed before being processed with
.BR grops ;
if the previewer is unable to display certain characters
or other constructs, then other substitute characters or constructs
can be used for previewing by bracketing them with these
.B \[rs]X
commands.
.
.
.RS
.LP
For example,
.B \%gxditview
is not able to display a proper
.B \[rs](em
character because the standard X11 fonts do not provide it;
this problem can be overcome by executing the following
request
.
.
.IP
.EX
\&.char \[rs][em] \[rs]X\[aq]ps: invis\[aq]\[rs]
\[rs]Z\[aq]\[rs]v\[aq]-.25m\[aq]\[rs]h\[aq].05m\[aq]\c
\[rs]D\[aq]l .9m 0\[aq]\[rs]h\[aq].05m\[aq]\[aq]\[rs]
\[rs]X\[aq]ps: endinvis\[aq]\[rs][em]
.EE
.
.
.LP
In this case,
.B \%gxditview
is unable to display the
.B \[rs](em
character and draws the line,
whereas
.B grops
prints the
.B \[rs](em
character
and ignores the line (this code is already in file
.B Xps.tmac
which is loaded if a document intended for
.B grops
is previewed with
.BR \%gxditview ).
.RE
.
.
.LP
If a PostScript procedure
.B BPhook
has been defined via a
.RB \[oq] ps:\ def \[cq]
or
.RB \[oq] ps:\ mdef \[cq]
device command, it is executed at the beginning of every page (before
anything is drawn or written by groff).
.
For example, to underlay the page contents with the word
\[oq]DRAFT\[cq] in light gray, you might use
.
.
.RS
.LP
.EX
\&.de XX
ps: def
/BPhook
{ gsave .9 setgray clippath pathbbox exch 2 copy
  .5 mul exch .5 mul translate atan rotate pop pop
  /NewCenturySchlbk-Roman findfont 200 scalefont setfont
  (DRAFT) dup stringwidth pop \-.5 mul \-70 moveto show
  grestore }
def
\&..
\&.devicem XX
.EE
.RE
.
.
.LP
Or, to cause lines and polygons to be drawn with square linecaps
and mitered linejoins instead of the round linecaps and linejoins
normally used by
.BR grops ,
use
.
.
.RS
.LP
.EX
\&.de XX
ps: def
/BPhook { 2 setlinecap 0 setlinejoin } def
\&..
\&.devicem XX
.EE
.RE
.
.
.LP
(square linecaps, as opposed to butt linecaps (0 setlinecap),
give true corners in boxed tables even though the lines are
drawn unconnected).
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Encapsulated PostScript"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.B grops
itself doesn't emit bounding box information.
.
With the help of Ghostscript the following simple script,
.BR groff2eps ,
produces an encapsulated PS file.
.
.
.RS
.LP
.EX
#! /bin/sh
groff \-P\-b16 $1 > $1.ps
gs \-dNOPAUSE \-sDEVICE=bbox \-\- $1.ps 2> $1.bbox
sed \-e "/\[ha]%%Orientation/r $1.bbox" \[rs]
    \-e "/\[ha]%!PS-Adobe-3.0/s/$/ EPSF-3.0/" $1.ps > $1.eps
rm $1.ps $1.bbox
.EE
.RE
.
.
.LP
Just say
.
.IP
.B
groff2eps foo
.
.LP
to convert file
.B foo
to
.BR foo.eps .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "TrueType and other font formats"
.\" ====================================================================
.
TrueType fonts can be used with
.I grops
if converted first to Type\~42 format,
a PostScript wrapper equivalent to the PFA format described in
.MR pfbtops @MAN1EXT@ .
.
Several methods exist to generate a Type\~42 wrapper;
some of them involve the use of a PostScript interpreter such as
Ghostscript\[em]see
.MR gs 1 .
.
.
.LP
One approach is to use
.UR https://fontforge.org/
FontForge
.UE ,
a font editor that can convert most outline font formats.
.
Here's an example of using the Roboto Slab Serif font with
.IR groff .
.
Several variables are used so that you can more easily adapt it into
your own script.
.
.
.RS 4
.LP
.EX
MAP=@FONTDIR@/devps/generate/textmap
TTF=/usr/share/fonts/truetype/roboto/slab/RobotoSlab\-Regular.ttf
BASE=$(basename \[dq]$TTF\[dq])
INT=${BASE%.ttf}
PFA=$INT.pfa
AFM=$INT.afm
GFN=RSR
DIR=$HOME/.local/groff/font
mkdir \-p \[dq]$DIR\[dq]/devps
fontforge \-lang=ff \-c \[dq]Open(\[rs]\[dq]$TTF\[rs]\[dq]);\[rs]
\tGenerate(\[rs]\[dq]$DIR/devps/$PFA\[rs]\[dq]);\[dq]
afmtodit \[dq]$DIR/devps/$AFM\[dq] \[dq]$MAP\[dq] \
\[dq]$DIR/devps/$GFN\[dq]
printf \[dq]$BASE\[rs]t$PFA\[rs]n\[dq] >> \[dq]$DIR/devps/download\[dq]
.EE
.RE
.
.
.LP
.I fontforge
and
.I afmtodit
may generate warnings depending on the attributes of the font.
.
The test procedure is simple.
.
.
.RS 4
.LP
.EX
printf \[dq].ft RSR\[rs]nHello, world!\[rs]n\[dq] | groff \-F \
\[dq]$DIR\[dq] > hello.ps
.EE
.RE
.
.
.LP
Once you're satisifed that the font works,
you may want to generate any available related styles
(for instance,
Roboto Slab
also has \[lq]Bold\[rq],
\[lq]Light\[rq],
and
\[lq]Thin\[rq]
styles)
and set up
.I GROFF_FONT_PATH
in your environment to include the directory you keep the generated
fonts in so that you don't have to use the
.B \-F
option.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Font installation"
.\" ====================================================================
.
This section summarizes the above explanations; it can serve as a
step-by-step font-installation guide for
.BR grops .
.
.IP \(bu
Convert your font to something groff understands.
.
This is either a PostScript Type\~1 font in PFA format or a PostScript
Type\~42 font, together with an AFM file.
.
.IP
The very first characters in a PFA file look like this:
.
.RS
.IP
.B %!PS-AdobeFont-1.0:
.RE
.
.IP
A PFB file has this also in the first line, but the string is
preceded with some binary bytes.
.
.IP
The very first characters in a Type\~42 font file look like this:
.
.RS
.IP
.B %!PS-TrueTypeFont
.RE
.
.IP
This is a wrapper format for TrueType fonts.
.
Old PS printers might not support it (that is, they might not have a
built-in TrueType font interpreter).
.
.IP
If your font is in PFB format (such fonts normally have
.I .pfb
as the file extension), you might use groff's
.MR pfbtops @MAN1EXT@
program to convert it to PFA.
.
For TrueType fonts, try
.B ttftot42
or
.BR fontforge .
For all other font formats use
.B fontforge
which can convert most outline font formats.
.
.IP \(bu
Convert the AFM file to a groff font description file with the
.MR afmtodit @MAN1EXT@
program.
.
An example call is
.
.RS
.IP
afmtodit Foo-Bar-Bold.afm textmap FBB
.RE
.
.IP
which converts the metric file
.I Foo-Bar-Bold.afm
to the groff
font
.IR FBB .
.
If you have a font family which comes with normal, bold, italic,
and bold italic faces, it is recommended to use the letters
.BR R ,
.BR B ,
.BR I ,
and
.BR BI ,
respectively, as postfixes in the groff font names to make groff's
\[oq].fam\[cq] request work.
.
An example is groff's built-in Times-Roman font: The font family
name is
.BR T ,
and the groff font names are
.BR TR ,
.BR TB ,
.BR TI ,
and
.BR TBI .
.
.IP \(bu
Install both the
.I groff
font description files and the fonts in a
.I devps
subdirectory of the font path which
.I groff
finds.
.
See section \[lq]Environment\[rq] in
.MR troff @MAN1EXT@
for the actual value of the font path.
.
.I groff
doesn't use the AFM files,
but it is a good idea to store them anyway.
.
.IP \(bu
Register all fonts which must be downloaded to the printer in the
.I devps/download
file.
.
Only the first occurrence of this file in the font path is read.
.
This means that you should copy the default
.I download
file to the first directory in your font path and add your fonts there.
.
To continue the above example we assume that the PS font name for
.I Foo-Bar-Bold.pfa
is \[oq]XY-Foo-Bar-Bold\[cq] (the PS font name is stored in the
.B internalname
field in the
.I FBB
file),
thus the following line should be added to
.IR download .
.
.RS
.IP
.B XY-Foo-Bar-Bold Foo-Bar-Bold.pfa
.
.RE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Old fonts"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I groff
versions 1.19.2 and earlier contained descriptions of a slightly
different set of the 35 Adobe core fonts;
the differences are mainly the lack of a Euro glyph and a reduced set of
kerning pairs.
.
For backwards compatibility,
these old font descriptions are also installed in the
.I @OLDFONTDIR@/devps
directory.
.
.
.LP
To use them,
make sure that
.I grops
finds the fonts before the default system fonts (with the same names):
Either add command-line option
.B \-F
to
.I grops
.
.IP
.B groff \-Tps \-P\-F \-P@OLDFONTDIR@ .\|.\|.
.
.LP
or add the directory to groff's font path environment variable
.
.IP
.B GROFF_FONT_PATH=@OLDFONTDIR@
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Environment
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I GROFF_FONT_PATH
A list of directories in which to seek the selected output device's
directory of device and font description files.
.
See
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@
and
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ .
.
.
.TP
.I GROPS_PROLOGUE
If this is set to
.IR foo ,
then
.B grops
uses the file
.I foo
(in the font path) instead of the default prologue file
.BR prologue .
.
The option
.B \-P
overrides this environment variable.
.
.
.TP
.I SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
A timestamp
(expressed as seconds since the Unix epoch)
to use as the creation timestamp in place of the current time.
.
The time is converted to human-readable form using
.MR ctime 3
and recorded in a PostScript comment.
.
.
.TP
.I TZ
The time zone to use when converting the current time
(or value of
.IR SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH )
to human-readable form;
see
.MR tzset 3 .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Files
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I @FONTDIR@/devps/DESC
Device description file.
.
.TP
.IR @FONTDIR@/devps/ F
Font description file for font
.IR F .
.
.TP
.I @FONTDIR@/devps/download
List of downloadable fonts.
.
.TP
.I @FONTDIR@/devps/text.enc
Encoding used for text fonts.
.
.TP
.I @MACRODIR@/ps.tmac
Macros for use with
.BR grops ;
automatically loaded by
.B troffrc
.
.TP
.I @MACRODIR@/pspic.tmac
Definition of
.B PSPIC
macro,
automatically loaded by
.IR ps.tmac .
.
.TP
.I @MACRODIR@/psold.tmac
Macros to disable use of characters not present in older
PostScript printers (e.g., \[oq]eth\[cq] or \[oq]thorn\[cq]).
.
.TP
.IR /tmp/grops XXXXXX
Temporary file.
See
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@
for details on the location of temporary files.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.UR http://\:partners\:.adobe\:.com/\:public/\:developer/\:en/\:ps/\
\:5001\:.DSC_Spec\:.pdf
PostScript Language Document Structuring Conventions Specification
.UE
.
.
.LP
.MR afmtodit @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR pfbtops @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR groff_char @MAN7EXT@ ,
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ ,
.MR groff_out @MAN5EXT@ ,
.MR groff_tmac @MAN5EXT@
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_grops_1_man_C]
.do rr *groff_grops_1_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
