'\" t
.TH grolbp @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
grolbp \- groff output driver for Canon CaPSL printers
.
.
.\" Modified by Francisco Andrés Verdú <pandres@dragonet.es> for the
.\" grolbp program.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1994-2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
.\" a permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for
.\" modified versions, except that this permission notice may be
.\" included in translations approved by the Free Software Foundation
.\" instead of in the original English.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_grolbp_1_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY grolbp
.RB [ \-l ]
.RB [ \-c\~\c
.IR num-copies ]
.RB [ \-F\~\c
.IR font-directory ]
.RB [ \-o\~\c
.IR orientation ]
.RB [ \-p\~\c
.IR paper-size ]
.RB [ \-w\~\c
.IR width ]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.
.SY grolbp
[\c
.BI \-\-copies= num-copies\c
] [\c
.BI \-\-fontdir= font-directory\c
] [\c
.B \-\-landscape\c
] [\c
.BI \-\-linewidth= width\c
] [\c
.BI \-\-orientation= orientation\c
] [\c
.BI \-\-papersize= paper-size\c
]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.YS
.
.
.SY grolbp
.B \-h
.
.SY grolbp
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.
.SY grolbp
.B \-v
.
.SY grolbp
.B \-\-version
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
The GNU
.I roff
LBP output driver translates the output of
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@
into a CaPSL and VDM format suitable for Canon LBP-4 and LBP-8 printers.
.
Normally,
.I grolbp
is invoked by
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@
when the latter is given the
.RB \[lq] \-T\~lbp \[rq]
option.
.
(In this installation,
.B @DEVICE@
is the default output device.)
.
Use
.IR groff 's
.B \-P
option to pass any options shown above to
.IR grolbp .
.
If no
.I file
arguments are given,
or if
.I file
is \[lq]\-\[rq],
.I grolbp
reads the standard input stream.
.
Output is written to the standard output stream.
.
.
.P
For compatibility with
.MR grolj4 @MAN1EXT@ ,
an additional drawing command is available.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]D\[aq]R\~ "dh dv" \[aq]
Draw a rule
(i.e., a solid black rectangle),
with one corner at the current position,
and the diagonally opposite corner at the current
position
.RI +( dh , dv ).
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Options
.\" ====================================================================
.
.B \-h
and
.B \-\-help
display a usage message,
while
.B \-v
and
.B \-\-version
show version information;
all exit afterward.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-c " num-copies"
.TQ
.BI \-\-copies= num-copies
Print
.I num-copies
copies of each page.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-F " font-directory"
.TQ
.BI \-\-fontdir= font-directory
Prepend directory
.RI font-directory /dev name
to the search path for font and device description files;
.I name
is the name of the device, usually
.BR lbp .
.
.
.TP
.B \-l
.TQ
.B \-\-landscape
Print the document with a landscape orientation.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-o " orientation"
.TQ
.BI \-\-orientation= orientation
Print the document with
.I orientation
orientation, which must be \(oqportrait\(cq or \(oqlandscape\(cq.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-p " paper-size"
.TQ
.BI \-\-papersize= paper-size
Set the paper size to
.IR paper-size ,
which must be a valid paper size description as indicated in section
\[lq]Paper Sizes\[rq], below.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-w " width"
.TQ
.BI \-\-linewidth= width
Set the default line thickness to
.I width
thousandths of an em;
the default is 0.04\~em.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Typefaces
.\" ====================================================================
.
The driver supports the Dutch,
Swiss,
and Swiss-Narrow scalable typefaces,
each in the regular,
bold,
italic,
and bold-italic styles.
.
Additionally,
the bitmapped,
monospaced Courier and Elite typefaces are available in regular,
bold,
and
italic styles;
Courier at 8 and 12 points,
Elite at 8 and 10 points.
.
The following chart summarizes the
.I groff
font names used to access them.
.
.
.TS
tab(|) allbox center;
c c c c c
ab c c c c
.
Typeface | Regular | Bold | Italic | Bold-Italic
Dutch | TR | TB | TI | TBI
Swiss | HR | HB | HI | HBI
Swiss Narrow | HNR | HNB | HNI | HNBI
Courier | CR | CB | CI |
Elite | ER | EB | EI |
.TE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Paper sizes"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The paper size can be set in the
.I DESC
file or with command-line options to
.I grolbp.
If the paper size is specified both ways,
the command-line options take
precedence over the contents of the
.I DESC
file
(this applies to the page orientation too).
.
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@
describes how to set the paper dimensions in the
.I DESC
file.
.
To set the paper size on the command line,
add
.RS
.EX
.BI \-p\~ paper-size
.EE
.RE
or
.RS
.EX
.BI \-\-papersize= paper-size
.EE
.RE
to the other
.I grolbp
options,
where
.I paper-size
is in the same format as in the
.I DESC
file.
.
If no paper size is specified in the
.I DESC
file or on the command line,
a default size of A4 is used.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Page orientation"
.\" ====================================================================
.
As with the page size,
the orientation of the page
.RB ( portrait
or
.BR landscape )
can be set in the
.I DESC
file or with command-line options.
.
These keywords are case insensitive.
.
To set the orientation in the
.I DESC
file,
insert a line
.RS
.EX
orientation portrait
.EE
.RE
or
.RS
.EX
orientation landscape
.EE
.RE
as desired.
.
The first valid orientation command in the
.I DESC
file is used.
.
.
To set the page orientation with command-line options you can use the
.B \-o
or
.B \-\-orientation
options with the same parameters
.RB ( portrait
or
.BR landscape )
as in the
.I DESC
file,
or the
.B \-l
option to select landscape orientation.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Font description files"
.\" ====================================================================
.
In addition to the font description file directives documented in
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ ,
.I grolbp
recognizes
.BR lbpname ,
which maps the
.I groff
font name to the font name used internally by the printer.
.
Its syntax is as follows.
.RS
.EX
.RI lbpname\~ printer-font-name
.EE
.RE
.
.
.BR lbpname 's
argument is case-sensitive.
.
The printer's font names are encoded as follows.
.
.
.P
For bitmapped fonts,
.I printer-font_name
has the form
.RS
.EX
.RI N\[la] base-font-name \[ra]\[la] font-style \[ra]
.EE
.RE
.I base-font-name
is the font name as it appears in the printer's font listings without
the first letter,
up to
(but not including)
the font size.
.
.I font-style
can be one of the letters
.BR R ,
.BR I ,
or
.BR B ,
.\" XXX: what about "BI"?
indicating the roman,
italic,
and bold styles,
respectively.
.
For instance,
if the printer's \[lq]font listing A\[rq]
shows \[lq]Nelite12I.ISO_USA\[rq],
the corresponding entry in the
.I groff
font description file is
.RS
.EX
lbpname NeliteI
.EE
.RE
.
You may need to modify
.I grolbp
to add support for new bitmapped fonts,
since the available font names and font sizes of bitmapped fonts
(as documented above)
are hard-coded into the program.
.
.
.P
For scalable fonts,
.I printer-font-name
is identical to the font name as it appears in the printer's \[lq]font
listing A\[rq].
.
For instance,
to select the \[lq]Swiss\[rq] font in bold-italic style,
which appears in the font listing
as \[lq]Swiss\-BoldOblique\[rq],
.RS
.EX
lbpname Swiss\-BoldOblique
.EE
.RE
is the required directive,
and this is what we find in the
.I groff
font description file
.I HBI
for the
.B lbp
device.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Environment
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I GROFF_FONT_PATH
A list of directories in which to seek the selected output device's
directory of device and font description files.
.
See
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@
and
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Files
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I @FONTDIR@/\:\%devlbp/\:DESC
describes the
.B lbp
output device.
.
.
.TP
.IR @FONTDIR@/\:\%devlbp/ F
describes the font known
.RI as\~ F
on device
.BR lbp .
.
.
.TP
.I @MACRODIR@/\:lbp\:.tmac
defines macros for use with the
.B lbp
output device.
.
It is automatically loaded by
.I troffrc
when the
.B lbp
output device is selected.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR groff_out @MAN5EXT@ ,
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ ,
.MR groff_char @MAN7EXT@
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_grolbp_1_man_C]
.do rr *groff_grolbp_1_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
