.TH groff_filenames @MAN5EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
groff_filenames \- filename conventions used in roff systems
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2013-2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" This file is part of groff, a free software project.  You can
.\" redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General
.\" Public License version 2 (GPL2) as published by the Free Software
.\" Foundation (FSF).
.\"
.\" The license text can be found in the internet at
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses>.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_groff_filenames_5_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
Since the evolution of
.I roff
in the 1970s, a whole bunch of filename extensions for
.I roff
files were used.
.
.
.P
The
.I roff
extensions refer to preprocessors or macro packages.
.
These extensions are fixed in all
.IR Unix \-like
operating systems.
.
.
.P
Later on,
.B groff
added some more extensions.
.
This
.I man page
is about these filename extensions.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Compression of \f[I]roff\f[] files"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Each
.I roff
file can be optionally
.IR compressed .
.
That means that the
.I total filename
ends with a
.IR "compressor name" .
.
So the whole filename has the structure
.IR <name> . <extension>[ . <compression>] .
.
.
.P
Best-known are the
.I compressor extensions
.BR .Z ,
.BR .gz ,
and
.BR .bzip2 .
.
Relatively new is
.BR .xz .
.
.
.P
From now on, we will ignore the
.I compressions
and only comment the structure
.IB <name> . <extension>\fR.\fP
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Man pages"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The
.I Unix manual pages
are widely called
.IR "man pages" .
.
The
.I man page
style is the best-known part of the
.I roff
language.
.
.
.P
The extensions for
.I man
should be better documented.
.
So this is documented here.
.
.
.P
Files written in the
.I man
language use the following extension:
.BI *. <section>[<group>] \fR.\fP
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Man page sections"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The traditional
.I man page <section>
is a digit from
.B 1
to
.BR 8 .
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .1
.TQ
.IB <name> .2
.TQ
.IB <name> .3
.TQ
.IB <name> .4
.TQ
.IB <name> .5
.TQ
.IB <name> .6
.TQ
.IB <name> .7
.TQ
.IB <name> .8
Classic man page
.IR sections .
.
.
.P
.\" NOTE: There was once a feeble attempt in this direction, but it
.\" hasn't been true in any sense for a long time.
.\"Linux added the section number
.\".B 9
.\"for kernel man pages.
.\".
.\".
.\".TP
.\".IB <name> .9
.\".I Linux
.\"kernel man pages
.\".
.\".
.P
In older commercial
.I Unix
systems, the 3 characters
.BR l ,
.BR n ,
and
.B o
were also used as
.I section
names.
.
This is today
.IR deprecated ,
but there are still documents in this format.
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .l
.TQ
.IB <name> .n
.TQ
.IB <name> .o
.I Deprecated
man page sections, which stood for \[lq]local\[rq], \[lq]new\[rq], and
\[lq]old\[rq], respectively.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Man page group extensions"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The
.I <group>
extension in
.BI . <section>[<group>]
is optional, but it can be any string of word characters.
.
Usually programmers use a group name that is already used, e.g.,
.B x
for
X Window System
documents or
.B tcl
to refer to the
.I Tcl
programming language.
.
.
.P
Examples:
.
.
.TP
.B groff.1
is the man page for
.B groff
in
.I section
.B 1
without a
.I group
.
.
.TP
.B xargs.1posix.gz
is the man page for the program
.B xargs
in
.I section
.B 1
and
.I group
.BR posix ;
moreover it is
.I compressed
with
.B gz
.RB ( gzip ).
.
.
.TP
.B config.5ssl
.I "OpenSSL CONF"
library configuration files from
.I section
.B 5
with
.I group
.BR ssl .
.
.
.TP
.B dpkg\-reconfigure.8cdebconf
man page for the program
.B dpkg\-reconfigure
in
.I section
.B 8
and
.I group
.BR cdebconf .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Source of man pages"
.\" ====================================================================
.
There are 2
.I roff
languages for writing man pages:
.B man
and
.BR mdoc .
.
.
.P
The names of these 2 styles are taken as
.I extensions
for the source code files of man pages in the
.I groff
package.
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .man
.I traditional
Unix-like man page format within groff source files.
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> . n
A temporary man page file produced from a
.IB name .man
man page by a run of
.B make
within the
.B groff
source package.
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .mdoc
Man page format in BSD.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Traditional \f[I]troff\f[] extensions"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Files using macro packages"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The
.I "classical roff"
languages were interpreted by the traditional
.B "troff"
and
.B "nroff"
programs.
.
.
.P
There were several
.I roff
languages, each represented by a
.IR "macro-package" .
.
Each of these provided a suitable file name
.IR extension :
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .me
.I roff
file using the
.B me
.IR "macro package" .
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .mm
.I roff
file using the
.B mm
.I macro package
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .ms
.I roff
file using the
.B ms
.I macro package
.
.
.P
All of these classical
.I roff
languages and their extensions are still very active in
.BR groff .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Source code for macro packages (\f[I]tmac\f[] files)"
.\" ====================================================================
.
In traditional
.I roff
the source code for the macro packages was stored in
.I TMAC
files.
.
Their file names have the form:
.
.
.TP
.BI tmac. <package> \fR,\fP
.I <package>
is the name of the macro package without the leading
.B m
character, which is reintegrated by the option
.BR \-m .
.
.
.P
For example,
.B tmac.an
is the source for the
.B man
macro package.
.
.
.P
In the
.B groff
source, more suitable file names were integrated; see later on.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Preprocessors
.\" ====================================================================
.
Moreover, the following
.I preprocessors
were used as filename extension:
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .chem
for the integration of chemical formulas
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .eqn
for the mathematical use of equations
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .pic
graphical tool
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .tbl
for tables with
.I tbl
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .ref
for files using the
.B prefer
.I preprocessor
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "\f[I]roff\f[] files"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.IB <name> .t
.TQ
.IB <name> .tr
for files using the
.I roff
language of any kind
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "New \f[I]groff\f[] extensions"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I "GNU roff"
.B groff
is the actual
.I roff
standard, both for classical
.I roff
and new extensions.
.
So even the used new extensions in the source code should be regarded
as actual standard.
.
The following extensions are used instead of classical
.B .t
or
.BR .tr :
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .groff
.TQ
.IB <name> .roff
general ending for files using the
.I groff language
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Source code for macro packages (\f[I]tmac\f[] files)"
.\" ====================================================================
.
As the classical form
.BI tmac. <package_without_m> \fR,\fP
of the
.I TMAC
file names is quite strange,
.
.I groff
added the following structures:
.
.
.TP
.IB <package_without_m> .tmac
.TQ
.BI m <package> .tmac
.TQ
.BI groff_m <package> .tmac
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Files using new macro packages"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I Groff
uses the following new macro packages:
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .mmse
file with swedish
.B mm
.I macros
for
.B groff
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .mom
files written in the
.I "groff macro package"
.B mom
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .www
files written in
.BR HTML -like
.I groff
.IR macros .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Preprocessors and postprocessors"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.IB <name> .hdtbl
Heidelberger tables, an alternative to the preprocessor
.IR tbl .
.
See
.MR groff_hdtbl @MAN7EXT@ .
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .grap
files written for the graphical
.B grap
processor.
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .grn
for including
.MR gremlin @MAN1EXT@ ,
pictures, see
.MR grn @MAN1EXT@ .
.
.
.TP
.IB <name> .pdfroff
transform this file with
.B pdfroff
of the
.I groff
system
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Authors
.\" ====================================================================
.
This document was written by
.MT groff\-bernd\:.warken\-72@\:web\:.de
Bernd Warken
.ME .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.
.TP
History and future
.MR roff @MAN7EXT@ ,
.MR man\-pages 7 ,
.MR groff_diff @MAN7EXT@ ,
.MR groff @MAN7EXT@
.
.
.TP
.I Compression
.MR uncompress 1posix ,
.MR gzip2 1 ,
.MR bzip2 1 ,
.MR xz 1
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_groff_filenames_5_man_C]
.do rr *groff_groff_filenames_5_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
