.TH gxditview @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
gxditview \- display groff intermediate output files in X11
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright 1991 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software
.\" and its documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee,
.\" provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and
.\" that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of M.I.T. not be used in
.\" advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software
.\" without specific, written prior permission.  M.I.T. makes no
.\" representations about the suitability of this software for any
.\" purpose.  It is provided "as is" without express or implied
.\" warranty.
.\"
.\" M.I.T. DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN
.\" NO EVENT SHALL M.I.T.  BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS
.\" OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
.\" NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
.\" WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_gxditview_1_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY gxditview
.RI [ X-toolkit-option \~.\|.\|.\&]
.RB [ \-backingStore\~\c
.IR backing-store-type ]
.RB [ \-filename\~\c
.IR string ]
.RB [ \-page\~\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ \-printCommand\~\c
.IR string ]
.RB [ \-resolution\~\c
.IR res ]
.I file
.YS
.
.
.SY gxditview
.B \-help
.
.SY gxditview
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I gxditview
interprets and displays the intermediate output format of
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@
on an X11\~display.
.
It uses the standard X11 fonts,
so it does not require access to the server machine for font loading.
.
There are several ways to use
.IR gxditview .
.
.
.PP
The
intermediate output format of
.IR groff ,
documented in
.MR groff_out @MAN5EXT@ ,
is produced by
.I \%@g@troff
or the
.B \-Z
option to
.IR groff .
.
.
It can be viewed by explicitly calling
.RB \[lq] gxditview
.IR file \[rq].
.
If the
.I file
operand is
.RB \[lq] \- \[rq],
.I gxditview
will read the standard input stream;
.I file
cannot be omitted.
.
The intermediate output format of
.I groff
is device-independent but not device-agnostic.
.
.I gxditview
can view it for all typesetter devices,
but the quality is device-dependent.
.
.I gxditview
will not display output for terminal
.RI ( nroff )
devices.
.
.
.PP
The best results are achieved with the
.BR X *
devices for
.IR groff 's
.B \-T
option,
of which there are four:
.BR \-TX75 ,
.BR \-TX75\-12 ,
.BR \-TX100 ,
and
.BR \-TX100\-12 .
.
They differ by the X\~resolution
(75 or 100 dots per inch)
and the base point size
(10 or 12 points).
.
They are especially built for
.IR gxditview .
.
When using one of these,
.I groff
generates the intermediate output for this device and calls
.I gxditview
automatically for viewing.
.
.
.P
.B \-X
produces good results only with
.BR \-Tps ,
.BR \-TX75 ,
.BR \-TX75\-12 ,
.BR \-TX100 ,
and
.BR \-TX100\-12 .
.
The default resolution for previewing
.B \-Tps
output is 75\|dpi;
this can be changed with the
.B \-resolution
option.
.
.
.PP
While
.I gxditview
is running,
the left mouse button brings up a menu with several entries.
.
.
.TP 13n
.B Next Page
Display the next page.
.
.
.TP
.B Previous Page
Display the previous page.
.
.
.TP
.B Select Page
Select a particular numbered page specified by a dialog box.
.
.
.TP
.B Print
Print the
.I groff
intermediate output using a command specified by a dialog box.
.
The default command initially displayed is controlled by the
.B printCommand
application resource,
and by the
.B \-printCommand
option.
.
.
.TP
.B Open
Open for display a new file specified by a dialog box.
.
The file should contain
.I groff
intermediate output.
.
If the filename starts with a bar or pipe symbol,
.RB \[lq] | \[rq]
it will be interpreted as a command from which to read.
.
.
.TP
.B Quit
Exit from
.BR gxditview .
.
.
.PP
The menu entries correspond to actions with similar but not identical
names,
which can also be accessed with keyboard accelerators.
.
The
.IR n ,
.IR Space ,
.IR Return ,
and
.I Next
.RI ( PgDn )
keys are bound to the
.B NextPage
action.
.
The
.IR p ,
.IR b ,
.IR BackSpace ,
.IR Delete ,
and
.I Prior
.RI ( PgUp )
keys are bound to the
.B PreviousPage
action.
.
The
.I g
key is bound to the
.B SelectPage
action.
.
The
.I o
key is bound to the
.B OpenFile
action.
.
The
.I q
key is bound to the
.B Quit
action.
.
The
.I r
key is bound to a
.B Rerasterize
action which rereads the current file,
and redisplays the current page;
if the current file is a command,
the command will be re-executed.
.
Vertical scrolling can be done with the
.I k
and
.I j
keys;
horizontal scrolling is bound to the
.I h
and
.I l
keys.
.
The arrow keys
.RI ( up ,
.IR down ,
.IR left ,
and
.IR right )
are also bound to the obvious scrolling actions.
.
.
.PP
The
.B paperlength
and
.B paperwidth
commands in the
.I DESC
file describing a
.I groff
output device specify the length and width in machine units of the
virtual page displayed by
.IR gxditview ;
see
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "X defaults"
.\" ====================================================================
.
This program uses the
.I Dvi
widget from the X\~Toolkit.
.
It understands all of the core resource names and classes as well as:
.
.
.TP
.BR width\~ (class\~ Width )
Specifies the width of the window.
.
.
.TP
.BR height\~ (class\~ Height )
Specifies the height of the window.
.
.
.TP
.BR foreground\~ (class\~ Foreground )
Specifies the default foreground color.
.
.
.TP
.BR font\~ (class\~ Font )
Specifies the font to be used for error messages.
.
.
.TP
.BR fontMap\~ (class\~ FontMap )
Specifies the mapping from
.I groff
font names to X\~font names.
.
This must be a string containing a sequence of lines.
.
Each line contains two whitespace-separated fields:
firstly the
.I groff
font name,
and secondly the XLFD
(X Logical Font Description).
.
The default is shown in subsection \[lq]Default font map\[rq] below.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Default font map"
.\" ====================================================================
.
XLFDs are long and unwieldy,
so some lines are shown broken and indented below.
.\" Break them after the POINT_SIZE field (in "decipoints", so "100").
.
.
.PP
.EX
TR  \-adobe\-times\-medium\-r\-normal\-\-*\-100\
\-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
TI  \-adobe\-times\-medium\-i\-normal\-\-*\-100\
\-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
TB  \-adobe\-times\-bold\-r\-normal\-\-*\-100\
\-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
TBI \-adobe\-times\-bold\-i\-normal\
\-\-*\-100\-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
CR  \-adobe\-courier\-medium\-r\-normal\-\-*\-100\" break
        \-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
CI  \-adobe\-courier\-medium\-o\-normal\" break
        \-\-*\-100\-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
CB  \-adobe\-courier\-bold\-r\-normal\
\-\-*\-100\-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
CBI \-adobe\-courier\-bold\-o\-normal\
\-\-*\-100\-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
HR  \-adobe\-helvetica\-medium\-r\-normal\" break
        \-\-*\-100\-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
HI  \-adobe\-helvetica\-medium\-o\-normal\" break
        \-\-*\-100\-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
HB  \-adobe\-helvetica\-bold\-r\-normal\" break
        \-\-*\-100\-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
HBI \-adobe\-helvetica\-bold\-o\-normal\" break
        \-\-*\-100\-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
NR  \-adobe\-new century schoolbook\-medium\-r\-normal\-\-*\-100\" break
        \-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
NI  \-adobe\-new century schoolbook\-medium\-i\-normal\-\-*\-100\" break
        \-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
NB  \-adobe\-new century schoolbook\-bold\-r\-normal\-\-*\-100\" break
        \-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
NBI \-adobe\-new century schoolbook\-bold\-i\-normal\-\-*\-100\" break
        \-*\-*\-*\-*\-iso8859\-1\[rs]n\[rs]
S   \-adobe\-symbol\-medium\-r\-normal\-\-*\-100\" break
        \-*\-*\-*\-*\-adobe\-fontspecific\[rs]n\[rs]
SS  \-adobe\-symbol\-medium\-r\-normal\-\-*\-100\" break
        \-*\-*\-*\-*\-adobe\-fontspecific\[rs]n\[rs]
.EE
.
.
.if t .ne 4v \" force section heading to the next page for groff 1.23.0
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Options
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I gxditview
accepts all of the standard X\~Toolkit command-line options along with
the additional options listed below.
.
.
.TP
.B \-help
This option indicates that a brief summary of the allowed options should
be printed.
.
.
.TP
.B \-page
This option specifies the page number of the document to be displayed.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-backingStore\~ backing-store-type
Because redisplay of the
.I groff
intermediate output window can take a perceiptible amount of time,
this option causes the server to save the window contents so that when
it is scrolled around the viewport,
the window is painted from contents saved in backing store.
.
.I backing-store-type
can be one of
.BR Always ,
.B WhenMapped
or
.BR NotUseful .
.
.
.TP
.BI \-printCommand\~ command
The default command displayed in the dialog box for the
.B Print
menu entry will be
.IR command .
.
.
.TP
.BI \-resolution\~ res
The
.I groff
intermediate output file will be displayed at a resolution of
.I res
dots per inch,
unless the
.I DESC
file contains the
.B X11
command,
in which case the device resolution will be used.
.
This corresponds to the
.I Dvi
widget's
.B resolution
resource.
.
The default is
.BR 75 .
.
.
.TP
.BI \-filename\~ string
The default filename displayed in the dialog box for the
.B Open
menu entry will be
.IR string .
.
This can be either a filename,
or a command starting with
.RB \[lq] | \[rq].
.
.
.PP
The following standard X\~Toolkit command-line arguments are commonly
used with
.IR gxditview .
.
.
.TP
.BI \-bg\~ color
This option specifies the color to use for the background of the window.
.
The default is
.RB \[lq] white \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.BI \-bd\~ color
This option specifies the color to use for the border of the window.
.
The default is
.RB \[lq] black \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.BI \-bw\~ number
This option specifies the width in pixels of the border surrounding the
window.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-fg\~ color
This option specifies the color to use for displaying text.
.
The default is
.RB \[lq] black \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.BI \-fn\~ font
This option specifies the font to be used for displaying widget text.
.
The default is
.RB \[lq] fixed \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.B \-rv
This option indicates that reverse video should be simulated by swapping
the foreground and background colors.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-geometry\~ geometry
This option specifies the preferred size and position of the window.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-display\~ host : display
This option specifies the X\~server to contact.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-xrm\~ resourcestring
This option specifies a resource string to be used.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Environment
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I GROFF_FONT_PATH
A list of directories in which to seek the selected output device's
directory of device and font description files.
.
See
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@
and
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Files
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I \%@APPRESDIR@/\:\%GXditview
.TQ
.I \%@APPRESDIR@/\:\%GXditview\-color
The default resource files of
.IR gxditview .
.
Users can override these values in the
.I .Xdefaults
file,
normally located in the user's home directory.
.
See
.MR xrdb 1
and
.MR appres 1
for more.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Examples
.\" ====================================================================
.
The following command views this man page with a base point size of 12.
.
.
.RS
.P
.EX
groff \-TX100\-12 \-man gxditview.1
.EE
.RE
.
.
.P
The quality of the result depends mainly on the chosen point size and
display resolution;
for rapid previewing,
however,
something like
.
.RS
.EX
.RI "groff \-X \-P\-resolution \-P100\~" document
.EE
.RE
.
yields acceptable results.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Authors
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I gxditview
and its predecessor
.I xditview
were written by
Keith Packard (MIT X Consortium),
Richard L.\& Hyde (Purdue),
David Slattengren (Berkeley),
Malcolm Slaney (Schlumberger Palo Alto Research),
Mark Moraes (University of Toronto),
and
James Clark.
.
.
.PP
This program is derived from
.IR xditview ;
portions of
.I xditview
originated in
.IR xtroff ,
which was derived from
.IR \%suntroff .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.UR https://\:www\:.x\:.org/\:releases/\:X11R7.6/\:doc/\:xorg\-docs/\
\:specs/\:XLFD/xlfd\:.html
\[lq]X Logical Font Description Conventions\[rq]
.UE ,
by Jim Flowers and Stephen Gildea.
.
.
.PP
.MR X 7 ,
.MR xrdb 1 ,
.MR xditview 1 ,
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR groff_out @MAN5EXT@
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_gxditview_1_man_C]
.do rr *groff_gxditview_1_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
