.TH xtotroff @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
xtotroff \- convert X font metrics into
.I groff
font metrics
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2004-2022 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
.\" a permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for
.\" modified versions, except that this permission notice may be
.\" included in translations approved by the Free Software Foundation
.\" instead of in the original English.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_xtotroff_1_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY xtotroff
.RB [ \-d\~\c
.IR destination-directory ]
.RB [ \-r\~\c
.IR resolution ]
.RB [ \-s\~\c
.IR type-size ]
.I font-map
.YS
.
.
.SY xtotroff
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.
.SY xtotroff
.B \-v
.
.SY xtotroff
.B \-\-version
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I xtotroff
uses
.I font-map
to create
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@
font description files from X11 fonts.
.
Each line in
.I font-map
consists of a series of lines of paired
.I groff
font names and X font names as X Logical Font Description (XLFD)
patterns,
with the pair members separated by spaces and/or tabs.
.
For example,
an input
.I font-map
file consisting of the line
.
.RS
.EX
TB \-adobe\-times\-bold\-r\-normal\-\-*\-*\-*\-*\-p\-*\-iso8859\-1
.EE
.RE
.
maps the XLFD on the right to the
.I groff
font name
.BR TB ,
conventionally \[lq]Times bold\[rq].
.
.
.PP
.I xtotroff
opens a connection to the running X server to query its font catalog,
and aborts if it cannot.
.
If necessary,
the wildcards in the XLFD patterns are populated with the arguments to
the
.B \-r
and
.B \-s
options.
.
If a font name is still ambiguous,
.I xtotroff
aborts.
.
For each successful mapping,
.I xtotroff
creates a
.I groff
font description file in the current working directory
(or that specified by the
.B -d
option)
named for each
.I groff
font,
and reports the mapping to the standard output stream.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Options
.\" ====================================================================
.
.B \-\-help
displays a usage message,
while
.B \-v
and
.B \-\-version
show version information;
all exit afterward.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-d\~ destination-directory
Write font descriptions to
.I destination-directory
rather than the current working directory.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-r\~ resolution
Set the resolution for all font patterns in
.IR font-map .
.
The value is used for both the horizontal and vertical motion quanta.
.
If not specified,
a resolution of 75dpi is assumed.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-s\~ type-size
Set the type size in points for all font patterns in
.IR font-map .
.
If not specified,
a size of 10 points is assumed.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Files
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I @FONTDIR@/\:\%FontMap\-X11
is the font mapping file used to produce the pre-generated font
description files,
supplied with
.IR groff ,
of X11 core fonts corresponding to the 13 base Type\~1 fonts for
PostScript level 1.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Bugs
.\" ====================================================================
.
The only supported font encodings are \[lq]iso8859\-1\[rq] and
\%\[lq]adobe\-\:fontspecific\[rq].
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.UR https://\:www\:.x\:.org/\:releases/\:X11R7.6/\:doc/\:xorg\-docs/\
\:specs/\:XLFD/xlfd\:.html
\[lq]X Logical Font Description Conventions\[rq]
.UE ,
by Jim Flowers and Stephen Gildea.
.
.
.PP
.MR X 7 ,
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR gxditview @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR troff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_xtotroff_1_man_C]
.do rr *groff_xtotroff_1_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
