.TH groff @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
groff \- front end to the GNU roff document formatting system
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2021 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" This file is part of groff, the GNU roff type-setting system.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
.\" document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
.\" Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
.\" Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts,
.\" and with no Back-Cover Texts.
.\"
.\" A copy of the Free Documentation License is included as a file
.\" called FDL in the main directory of the groff source package.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_groff_1_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.\" Define a string for the TeX logo.
.ie t .ds TeX T\h'-.1667m'\v'.224m'E\v'-.224m'\h'-.125m'X
.el   .ds TeX TeX
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY groff
.RB [ \-abcCeEgGijklNpRsStUVXzZ ]
.RB [ \-d\~\c
.IR cs ]
.RB [ \-d\~\c
.IB name =\c
.IR string ]
.RB [ \-D\~\c
.IR enc ]
.RB [ \-f\~\c
.IR fam ]
.RB [ \-F\~\c
.IR dir ]
.RB [ \-I\~\c
.IR dir ]
.RB [ \-K\~\c
.IR enc ]
.RB [ \-L\~\c
.IR arg ]
.RB [ \-m\~\c
.IR name ]
.RB [ \-M\~\c
.IR dir ]
.RB [ \-n\~\c
.IR num ]
.RB [ \-o\~\c
.IR list ]
.RB [ \-P\~\c
.IR arg ]
.RB [ \-r\~\c
.IR cn ]
.RB [ \-r\~\c
.IB reg =\c
.IR expr ]
.RB [ \-T\~\c
.IR dev ]
.RB [ \-w\~\c
.IR name ]
.RB [ \-W\~\c
.IR name ]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.YS
.
.
.SY groff
.B \-h
.
.SY groff
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.
.SY groff
.B \-v
.RI [ option\~ .\|.\|.\&]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.
.SY groff
.B \-\-version
.RI [ option\~ .\|.\|.\&]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I groff
is the primary front end to the GNU
.I roff
document formatting system.
.
GNU
.I roff
transforms text input files into typeset output in a variety of formats,
such as PDF and HTML.
.
It is also used to format man pages for viewing on terminals.
.
The
.I groff
command orchestrates the execution of preprocessors,
the loading of macro packages,
the formatting of input documents,
and the production of output appropriate to a variety of hardware
devices and file formats.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Options
.\" ====================================================================
.
.B \-h
and
.B \-\-help
display a usage message and exit.
.
.
.P
Because
.I groff
is intended to subsume most users' direct invocations of the
.IR \%@g@troff (@MAN1EXT@)
formatter,
the two programs share a set of options.
.
However,
.I groff
has some options that
.I \%@g@troff
does not share,
and others which
.I groff
interprets differently.
.
At the same time,
not all valid
.I \%@g@troff
options can be given to
.IR groff .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "\f[I]groff\f[]-specific options"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The following options either do not exist for
.I \%@g@troff
or are interpreted differently by
.IR groff .
.
.
.TP
.BI \-D\~ enc
Set default input encoding used by
.IR preconv (@MAN1EXT@)
to
.IR enc ;
implies
.BR \-k .
.
.
.TP
.B \-e
Run
.IR \%@g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
preprocessor.
.
.
.TP
.B \-g
Run
.IR \%@g@grn (@MAN1EXT@)
preprocessor.
.
.
.TP
.B \-G
Run
.IR grap (1)
preprocessor;
implies
.BR \-p .
.
.
.TP
.BI \-I\~ dir
Works as
.IR \%@g@troff 's
option
(see below),
but also implies
.B \-g
and
.BR \-s .
.
It is passed to
.IR \%@g@soelim (@MAN1EXT@)
and the output driver,
and
.I \%@g@grn
is passed an
.B \-M
option with
.I dir
as its argument.
.
.
.TP
.B \-j
Run
.IR \%@g@chem (@MAN1EXT@)
preprocessor;
implies
.BR \-p .
.
.
.TP
.B \-k
Run
.IR preconv (@MAN1EXT@),
which is run before any other preprocessor.
.
Please refer to
.IR preconv 's
manual page for its behavior if neither of
.IR groff 's
.B \-K
or
.B \-D
options is also specified.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-K\~ enc
Set input encoding used by
.IR preconv (@MAN1EXT@)
to
.IR enc ;
implies
.BR \-k .
.
.
.TP
.B \-l
Send the output to a spooler program for printing.
.
The
.RB \[lq] print \[rq]
directive in the device description file
specifies the default command to be used;
see
.IR \%groff_font (@MAN5EXT@).
.
If no such directive is present for the output device,
output is piped to
.IR lpr (1).
.
See options
.B \-L
and
.BR \-X .
.
.
.TP
.BI \-L\~ arg
Pass
.I arg
to the print spooler program.
.
If multiple
.IR arg s
are required,
each should be passed with a separate
.B \-L
option.
.
.I groff
does not prepend
\[lq]\-\[rq]
(a minus sign)
to
.I arg
before passing it to the spooler program.
.
.
.TP
.B \-N
Don't allow newlines within
.I eqn \" language
delimiters.
.
This is the same as the
.B \-N
option in
.IR \%@g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.
.TP
.B \-p
Run
.IR \%@g@pic (@MAN1EXT@)
preprocessor.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-P\~ arg
Pass
.I arg
to the postprocessor.
.
If multiple
.IR arg s
are required,
each should be passed with a separate
.B \-P
option.
.
.I groff
does not prepend
\[lq]\-\[rq]
(a minus sign)
to
.I arg
before passing it to the postprocessor.
.
.
.TP
.B \-R
Run
.IR \%@g@refer (@MAN1EXT@)
preprocessor.
.
No mechanism is provided for passing arguments to
.I \%@g@refer
because most
.I \%@g@refer
options have equivalent language elements that can be specified within
the document;
see
.IR \%@g@refer (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.
.TP
.B \-s
Run
.IR \%@g@soelim (@MAN1EXT@)
preprocessor.
.
.
.TP
.B \-S
Operate in \[lq]safer\[rq] mode;
see
.B \-U
below for its opposite.
.
For security reasons,
safer mode is enabled by default.
.
.
.TP
.B \-t
Run
.IR \%@g@tbl (@MAN1EXT@)
preprocessor.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-T\~ dev
Direct
.I \%@g@troff
to format the input for the device
.IR dev .
.
.I groff
then calls a postprocessor to convert
.IR \%@g@troff 's
output to a format appropriate for
.IR dev .
.
See subsection \[lq]Devices\[rq] below.
.
.
.TP
.B \-U
Operate in unsafe mode;
see
.BR \-S .
.
Pass the
.B \-U
option to
.I \%@g@pic
and
.IR \%@g@troff .
.
.
.TP
.B \-v
.TQ
.B \-\-version
Write version information of
.I groff
and of all programs run by it to the standard output stream;
that is,
the given command line is processed in the usual way,
passing
.B \-v
to the formatter and any pre- or postprocessors invoked.
.
.
.TP
.B \-V
Output the pipeline that would be run by
.I groff
(as a wrapper program)
to the standard output stream,
but do not execute it.
.
If given more than once,
the pipeline is both written to the standard error stream and run.
.
.
.TP
.B \-X
Use
.IR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@)
instead of the usual postprocessor to (pre)view a document on an X11
display.
.
.
.TP
.B \-Z
Disable postprocessing.
.
.I \%@g@troff
output will appear on the standard output stream
(unless suppressed with
.BR \-z );
see
.IR \%groff_out (@MAN5EXT@)
for a description of this format.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Transparent options"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The following options are passed as-is to the formatter program
.IR \%@g@troff (@MAN1EXT@),
and described in more detail in its man page.
.
.
.TP
.B \-a
Generate a plain text approximation of the typeset output.
.
.
.TP
.B \-b
Write a backtrace to the standard error stream on each error or warning.
.
.
.TP
.B \-c
Start with color output disabled.
.
.
.TP
.B \-C
Enable AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
compatibility mode;
implies
.BR \-c .
.
.
.TP
.BI \-d\~ cs
.TQ
.BI \-d\~ name = string
Define string.
.
.
.TP
.B \-E
Inhibit
.I \%@g@troff
error messages;
implies
.BR \-Ww .
.
.
.TP
.BI \-f\~ fam
Set default font family.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-F\~ dir
Search in directory
.I dir
for the selected output device's directory of device and font
description files.
.
.
.TP
.B \-i
Process standard input after the specified input files.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-I\~ dir
Search
.I dir
for input files.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-m\~ name
Process
.RI name .tmac
before any input files.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-M\~ dir
Search directory
.I dir
for macro files.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-n\~ num
Number the first page
.IR num .
.
.
.TP
.BI \-o\~ list
Output only pages in
.IR list .
.
.
.TP
.BI \-r\~ cn
.TQ
.BI \-r\~ reg = expr
Define register.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-w\~ name
.TQ
.BI \-W\~ name
Enable
.RB ( \-w )
or inhibit
.RB ( \-W )
emission of warnings in category
.IR name .
.
.
.TP
.B \-z
Suppress formatted device-independent output of
.IR \%@g@troff .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Usage
.\" ====================================================================
.
The architecture of the GNU
.I roff
system
follows that of other device-independent
.I roff
implementations,
comprising preprocessors,
macro packages,
output drivers
(or \[lq]postprocessors\[rq]),
a suite of utilities,
and the formatter
.I \%@g@troff
at its heart.
.
See
.IR roff (@MAN7EXT@)
for a survey of how a
.I roff
system works.
.
.
.P
The front end programs available in the GNU
.I roff
system make it easier to use than traditional
.IR roff s
that required the construction of pipelines or use of temporary files to
carry a source document from maintainable form to device-ready output.
.
The discussion below summarizes the constituent parts of the GNU
.I roff
system.
.
It complements
.IR roff (@MAN7EXT@)
with
.IR groff -specific
information.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Getting started"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Those who prefer to learn by experimenting or are desirous of rapid
feedback from the system may wish to start with a \[lq]Hello,
world!\[rq]\& document.
.
.
.P
.EX
$ \c
.B echo \[dq]Hello, world!\[dq] | groff \-Tascii | sed \[aq]/^$/d\[aq]
Hello, world!
.EE
.
.
.P
We used a
.I sed
command only to eliminate the 65 blank lines that would otherwise flood
the terminal screen.
.
.RI ( roff
systems were developed in the days of paper-based terminals with 66
lines to a page.)
.
.
.P
Today's users may prefer output to a UTF-8-capable terminal.
.
.
.P
.EX
$ \c
.B echo \[dq]Hello, world!\[dq] | groff \-Tutf8 | sed \[aq]/^$/d\[aq]
.EE
.
.
.P
Producing PDF,
HTML,
or \*[TeX]'s DVI is also straightforward.
.
The hard part may be selecting a viewer program for the output.
.
.
.P
.EX
$ \c
.B echo \[dq]Hello, world!\[dq] | groff \-Tpdf > hello.pdf
$ \c
.B evince hello.pdf
$ \c
.B echo \[dq]Hello, world!\[dq] | groff \-Thtml > hello.html
$ \c
.B firefox hello.html
$ \c
.B echo \[dq]Hello, world!\[dq] | groff \-Tdvi > hello.dvi
$ \c
.B xdvi hello.html
.EE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Using \f[I]groff\f[] as a REPL"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Those with a programmer's bent may be pleased to know that they can use
.I groff
in a read-evaluate-print loop (REPL).
.
Doing so can be handy to verify one's understanding of the formatter's
behavior and/or the syntax it accepts.
.
Turning on all warnings with
.B \-ww
can aid this goal.
.
.
.P
.EX
$ \c
.B groff \-ww \-Tutf8
.B \[rs]# This is a comment.  Let\[aq]s define a register.
.B .nr a 1
.B \[rs]# Do integer arithmetic with operators evaluated left-to-right.
.B .nr b \[rs]n[a]+5/2
.B \[rs]# Let\[aq]s get the result on the standard error stream.
.B .tm \[rs]n[b]
3
.B \[rs]# Now we\[aq]ll define a string.
.B .ds name Leslie\[rs]" This is another form of comment.
.B .nr b (\[rs]n[a] + (7/2))
.B \[rs]# Center the next two text input lines.
.B .ce 2
.B Hi, \[rs]*[name].
.B Your secret number is \[rs]n[b].
.B \[rs]# We will see that the division rounded toward zero.
.B It is
.B \[rs]# Here\[aq]s an if-else control structure.
.B .ie (\[rs]n[b] % 2) odd.
.B .el even.
.B \[rs]# This trick sets the page length to the current vertical
.B \[rs]# position, so that blank lines don\[aq]t spew when we\[aq]re \
done.
.B .pl \[rs]n[nl]u
.I <Control-D>
                           Hi, Leslie.
                    Your secret number is 4.
It is even.
.EE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Paper size"
.\" ====================================================================
.
In
.IR groff ,
the page dimensions for the formatter
.I \%@g@troff
and for output devices are handled separately.
.
In the formatter,
requests are used to set the page length
.RB ( .pl ),
page offset
(or left margin,
.BR .po ),
and line length
.RB ( .ll ).
.
The right margin is not explicitly configured;
the combination of page offset and line length provides the information
necessary to derive it.
.
The
.I papersize
macro package,
automatically loaded by
.I troffrc
at start-up,
provides an interface for configuring page dimensions by convenient
names,
like \[lq]letter\[rq] or
\[lq]A4\[rq];
see
.IR groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@).
.
The default used by the formatter depends on its build configuration,
but is usually one of the foregoing,
as geographically appropriate.
.
.
.P
It is up to each macro package to respect the page dimensions configured
in this way.
.
Some offer alternative mechanisms.
.
.
.P
For each output driver,
the size of the output medium can be set in its
.I DESC
file.
.
Most also recognize a command-line option
.B \-p
to override the default dimensions and an option
.B \-l
to use landscape orientation.
.
See
.IR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@)
for a description of the
.B papersize
directive,
which takes an argument of the same form as
.BR \-p .
.
The output driver's man page,
such as
.IR grops (@MAN1EXT@),
may also be helpful.
.
.I groff
uses the command-line option
.B \-P
to pass options to output devices;
for example,
use the following for PostScript output on A4 paper in landscape
orientation.
.
.
.IP
.EX
groff \-Tps \-dpaper=a4l \-P\-pa4 \-P\-l \-ms foo.ms > foo.ps
.EE
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Front end"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The
.I groff
program is a wrapper around the
.IR \%@g@troff (@MAN1EXT@)
program.
.
It allows one to specify preprocessors via command-line options and
automatically runs the appropriate postprocessor for the selected
output device.
.
Doing so,
the manual construction of pipelines or management of temporary files
required of users of traditional
.IR roff (@MAN7EXT@)
systems can be avoided.
.
The
.IR grog (@MAN1EXT@)
program can be used to infer an appropriate
.I groff
command line to format a document.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Language
.\" ====================================================================
.
Input to a
.I roff
system is in plain text interleaved with control lines and escape
sequences.
.
The combination constitutes a document in one of a family of languages
we also call
.IR roff ;
see
.IR roff (@MAN7EXT@)
for background.
.
An overview of GNU
.I roff
language syntax and features,
including lists of all supported escape sequences,
requests,
and pre-defined registers,
can be found in
.IR groff (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.I groff
extensions to the AT&T
.I troff
language,
a common subset of
.I roff
dialects extant today,
are detailed in
.IR \%groff_diff (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Preprocessors
.\" ====================================================================
.
A preprocessor is an interpreter of a domain-specific language that
produces
.I roff
language output.
.
Frequently,
such input is confined to sections or regions of a
.I roff
input file
(bracketed with macro calls specific to each preprocessor),
which it replaces.
.
Preprocessors therefore often interpret a subset of
.I roff
syntax along with their own language.
.
GNU
.I roff
provides reimplementations of most preprocessors familiar to users of
AT&T
.IR troff ; \" AT&T
these routinely have extended features and/or require GNU
.I troff \" GNU
to format their output.
.
Preprocessors distributed with GNU
.I roff
include
.
.
.RS
.TP
.IR \%@g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
for mathematical formulae,
.
.
.TP
.IR \%@g@grn (@MAN1EXT@)
for pictures in
.IR gremlin (1)
format,
.
.
.TP
.IR \%@g@pic (@MAN1EXT@)
for diagrams,
.
.
.TP
.IR \%@g@chem (@MAN1EXT@)
for chemical structure diagrams,
.
.
.TP
.IR \%@g@refer (@MAN1EXT@)
for bibliographic references,
.
.
.TP
.IR \%@g@soelim (@MAN1EXT@)
to preprocess files included with
.I roff \" language
.B .so
requests,
and
.
.
.TP
.IR \%@g@tbl (@MAN1EXT@)
for tables.
.RE
.
.
.P
A preprocessor unique to GNU
.I roff
is
.IR \%preconv (@MAN1EXT@),
which converts various input encodings to something GNU
.I troff \" GNU
can understand.
.
When used,
it is run before any other preprocessors.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Macro packages"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Macro files are
.I roff
input files designed to produce no output themselves but instead ease
the preparation of other
.I roff
documents.
.
When a macro file is installed at a standard location and suitable for
use by a general audience,
it is termed a macro package.
.
.
.P
Macro packages can be loaded prior to any
.I roff
input documents with the
.BR \-m \~option.
.
The
.I groff
system implements most well-known macro packages for AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
.\" exceptions: mpm, mv
in a compatible way,
extends them,
and adds some packages of its own.
.
Several of them have one- or two-letter names due to the intense sense
of naming economy practiced in early Unix culture.
.
This laconic approach led to many of the packages being identified in
general usage with the
.I nroff
and
.I troff
option letter used to invoke them,
sometimes to punning effect,
as with \[lq]man\[rq]
(short for \[lq]manual\[rq]),
and even with the option dash,
as in the case of the
.I s
package,
much better known as
.I ms
or even
.IR \-ms .
.
.
.P
Macro packages serve a variety of purposes.
.
Some are \[lq]full-service\[rq] packages,
adopting responsibility for page layout among other fundamental tasks,
and defining their own lexicon of macros for document composition;
each such package stands alone and a given document can use at most one.
.
GNU
.I roff
provides the following such packages.
.
.
.TP
.I an
is used to compose man pages in the format originating in Version\~7
Unix (1979);
see
.IR groff_man (@MAN7EXT@).
.
It can be specified on the command line as
.BR \-man .
.
.
.TP
.I doc
is used to compose man pages in the format originating in 4.3BSD-Reno
(1990);
see
.IR groff_mdoc (@MAN7EXT@).
.
It can be specified on the command line as
.BR \-mdoc .
.
.
.TP
.I e
is the Berkeley general-purpose macro suite,
developed as an alternative to AT&T's
.IR s ;
see
.IR groff_me (@MAN7EXT@).
.
It can be specified on the command line as
.BR \-me .
.
.
.TP
.I m
implements the format used by the
second-generation AT&T macro suite for general documents,
a successor to
.IR s ;
see
.IR groff_mm (@MAN7EXT@).
.
It can be specified on the command line as
.BR \-mm .
.
.
.TP
.I om
(invariably called \[lq]mom\[rq])
is a modern package written by Peter Schaffter specifically for
.I groff.
.
Consult the
.I mom
HTML manual at
.I \%@HTMLDOCDIR@/\:mom/\:toc\:.html
for extensive documentation.
.
She\[em]for
.I mom
takes the female pronoun\[em]can be specified on the command line as
.BR \-mom .
.
.
.TP
.I s
is the original AT&T general-purpose document format;
see
.IR groff_ms (@MAN7EXT@).
.
It can be specified on the command line as
.BR \-ms .
.
.
.P
Others are supplemental.
.
For instance,
.
.I \%andoc
is a wrapper package specific to
.I groff
that recognizes whether a document uses
.I man
or
.I mdoc
format and loads the corresponding macro package.
.
It can be specified on the command line as
.BR \%\-mandoc .
.
A
.IR man (1)
librarian program \" such as man-db, since 2001
may use this macro file to delegate loading of the correct macro
package;
it is thus unnecessary for
.I man
itself to scan the contents of a document to decide the issue.
.
.
.P
Many macro files augment the function of the full-service packages,
or of
.I roff
documents that do not employ such a package\[em]the latter are sometimes
characterized as \[lq]raw\[rq].
.
These auxiliary packages are described,
along with
details of macro file naming and placement,
in
.IR groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@).
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Formatters
.\" ====================================================================
.
The central
.I roff
formatter within the
.I groff
system is
.IR \%@g@troff (@MAN1EXT@).
.
It provides the features of both the classical
.I troff
and
.IR nroff ,
as well as the
.I groff
extensions.
.
The command-line option
.B \-C
switches
.I \%@g@troff
into
.I "compatibility mode"
which tries to emulate classical
.I roff
as much as possible.
.
.
.P
There is a shell script
.IR \%@g@nroff (@MAN1EXT@)
that emulates the behavior of classical
.IR nroff .
.
It tries to automatically select the proper output encoding,
according to the current locale.
.
.
.P
The formatter program generates a device-independent,
but not device-agnostic,
intermediate output format,
documented in
.IR groff_out (@MAN5EXT@).
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Devices
.\" ====================================================================
.
Real devices in
.I groff
are
.
.RS
.RS
.TP
dvi
TeX DVI format
(postprocessor is
.IR grodvi (@MAN1EXT@)).
.
.TP
html
.TQ
xhtml
HTML and XHTML output
(preprocessors are
.I \%@g@soelim
and
.IR \%pre-grohtml ,
postprocessor is
.IR \%post-grohtml ).
.
.TP
lbp
Canon CaPSL printers
(\%LBP-4 and \%LBP-8 series laser printers;
postprocessor is
.IR grolbp (@MAN1EXT@)).
.
.TP
lj4
HP LaserJet4-compatible
(or other PCL5-compatible)
printers
(postprocessor
is
.IR grolj4 (@MAN1EXT@)).
.
.TP
ps
PostScript output (postprocessor is
.IR grops (@MAN1EXT@)).
.
.TP
pdf
Portable Document Format (PDF) output (postprocessor is
.IR gropdf (@MAN1EXT@)).
.RE
.RE
.
.
.IP
For the following TTY output devices
(where postprocessor is
.IR grotty (@MAN1EXT@)),
.B \-T
selects the output encoding:
.
.
.RS
.RS
.TP
ascii
ISO 646 1991:IRV,
also known as US-ASCII.
.
.
.TP
cp1047
IBM code page 1047,
an EBCDIC arrangement of ISO Latin-1.
.
.
.TP
latin1
ISO Latin-1
(ISO 8859-1).
.
.
.TP
utf8
ISO 10646 (\[lq]Unicode\[rq]) character set in UTF-8 encoding.
.
This encoding has the largest character repertoire,
so it is the best choice for terminal output.
.RE
.RE
.
.
.IP
The following arguments select
.I \%gxditview
as the postprocessor.
.
.
.RS
.RS
.TP
X75
75\|dpi resolution,
10\|pt document base font.
.TP
X75\-12
75\|dpi resolution,
12\|pt document base font.
.TP
X100
100\|dpi resolution,
10\|pt document base font.
.TP
X100\-12
100\|dpi resolution,
12\|pt document base font.
.RE
.RE
.
.IP
The default device is
.BR @DEVICE@ .
.
In
.IR roff ,
the output targets are called
.IR devices .
A device can be a piece of hardware, e.g., a printer, or a software
file format.
.
A device is specified by the option
.BR \-T .
.
The
.I groff
devices are as follows.
.
.TP
.B ascii
Text output using the
.IR ascii (7)
character set.
.
.TP
.B cp1047
Text output using the EBCDIC code page IBM cp1047 (e.g., OS/390 Unix).
.
.TP
.B dvi
TeX DVI format.
.
.TP
.B html
HTML output.
.
.TP
.B latin1
Text output using the ISO \%Latin-1 (ISO \%8859-1) character set; see
.IR \%iso_8859_1 (7).
.
.TP
.B lbp
Output for Canon CaPSL printers (\%LBP-4 and \%LBP-8 series laser
printers).
.
.TP
.B lj4
HP LaserJet4-compatible (or other PCL5-compatible) printers.
.
.TP
.B ps
PostScript output; suitable for printers and previewers like
.IR gv (1).
.
.TP
.B pdf
PDF files; suitable for viewing with tools such as
.IR evince (1)
and
.IR okular (1).
.
.TP
.B utf8
Text output using the Unicode (ISO 10646) character set with \%UTF-8
encoding; see
.IR unicode (7).
.
.TP
.B xhtml
XHTML output.
.
.TP
.B X75
75dpi X Window System output suitable for the previewers
.IR \%xditview (1x)
and
.IR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@).
.
A variant for a 12\|pt document base font is
.BR \%X75-12 .
.
.TP
.B X100
100dpi X Window System output suitable for the previewers
.IR \%xditview (1x)
and
.IR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@).
.
A variant for a 12\|pt document base font is
.BR \%X100-12 .
.
.
.P
The postprocessor to be used for a device is specified by the
.B postpro
directive in the device description file;
see
.IR \%groff_font (@MAN5EXT@).
.
This can be overridden with the
.B \-X
option.
.
.P
The default device is
.BR @DEVICE@ .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Postprocessors
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I groff
provides 3\~hardware postprocessors:
.
.TP
.IR \%grolbp (@MAN1EXT@)
for some Canon printers,
.
.TP
.IR \%grolj4 (@MAN1EXT@)
for printers compatible to the HP LaserJet\~4 and PCL5,
.
.TP
.IR \%grotty (@MAN1EXT@)
for text output using various encodings, e.g., on text-oriented
terminals or line printers.
.
.
.P
Today, most printing or drawing hardware is handled by the operating
system, by device drivers, or by software interfaces, usually
accepting PostScript.
.
Consequently, there isn't an urgent need for more hardware device
postprocessors.
.
.
.P
The
.I groff
software devices for conversion into other document file formats are
.
.TP
.IR \%grodvi (@MAN1EXT@)
for the DVI format,
.
.TP
.IR \%grohtml (@MAN1EXT@)
for HTML and XHTML formats,
.
.TP
.IR grops (@MAN1EXT@)
for PostScript.
.
.TP
.IR gropdf (@MAN1EXT@)
for PDF.
.
.
.P
Combined with the many existing free conversion tools this should
be sufficient to convert a
.I troff
document into virtually any existing data format.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Utilities
.\" ====================================================================
.
The following utility programs around
.I groff
are available.
.
.TP
.IR \%addftinfo (@MAN1EXT@)
Add information to
.I troff
font description files for use with
.IR groff .
.
.TP
.IR \%afmtodit (@MAN1EXT@)
Create font description files for PostScript device.
.
.TP
.IR eqn2graph (@MAN1EXT@)
Convert an
.I eqn
image into a cropped image.
.
.TP
.IR \%gdiffmk (@MAN1EXT@)
Mark differences between
.IR groff ,
.IR nroff ,
or
.I troff
files.
.
.TP
.IR \%grap2graph (@MAN1EXT@)
Convert a
.I grap
diagram into a cropped bitmap image.
.
.TP
.IR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@)
The
.I groff
X viewer, the \f[CR]GNU\f[] version of
.IR xditview .
.
.TP
.IR \%hpftodit (@MAN1EXT@)
Create font description files for lj4 device.
.
.TP
.IR \%@g@indxbib (@MAN1EXT@)
Make inverted index for bibliographic databases.
.
.TP
.IR lkbib (@MAN1EXT@)
Search bibliographic databases.
.
.TP
.IR \%@g@lookbib (@MAN1EXT@)
Interactively search bibliographic databases.
.
.TP
.IR \%pdfroff (@MAN1EXT@)
Create PDF documents using
.IR groff .
.
.TP
.IR \%pfbtops (@MAN1EXT@)
Translate a PostScript font in \&.pfb format to \f[CR]ASCII\f[].
.
.TP
.IR \%pic2graph (@MAN1EXT@)
Convert a
.I pic
diagram into a cropped image.
.
.TP
.IR \%tfmtodit (@MAN1EXT@)
Create font description files for TeX DVI device.
.
.TP
.IR \%xditview (1x)
.I roff
viewer historically distributed with the X Window System.
.\" Nowadays (2017) it's its own module as X.Org does not do monolithic
.\" releases anymore (since 2012).  Development on "app/xditview" is
.\" close to moribund, though.
.
.TP
.IR \%xtotroff (@MAN1EXT@)
Convert X font metrics into \f[CR]GNU\f[]
.I troff
font metrics.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Environment
.\" ====================================================================
.
Normally, the path separator in the following environment variables is
the colon; this may vary depending on the operating system.
.
For example, DOS and Windows use a semicolon instead.
.
.
.TP
.I GROFF_BIN_PATH
This search path, followed by
.IR PATH ,
is used for commands that are executed by
.IR groff .
.
If it is not set then the directory where the
.I groff
binaries were installed is prepended to
.IR PATH .
.
.
.TP
.I GROFF_COMMAND_PREFIX
When there is a need to run different
.I roff
implementations at the same time
.I groff
provides the facility to prepend a prefix to most of its programs that
could provoke name clashings at run time (default is to have none).
.
Historically, this prefix was the character
.BR g ,
but it can be anything.
.
For example,
.I gtroff
stood for
.IR groff 's
.IR troff ,
.I gtbl
for the
.I groff
version of
.IR tbl .
.
By setting
.I \%GROFF_COMMAND_PREFIX
to different values, the different
.I roff
installations can be addressed.
.
More exactly, if it is set to prefix
.I xxx
then
.I groff
as a wrapper program internally calls
.IB xxx troff
instead of
.IR troff .
.
This also applies to the preprocessors
.IR eqn ,
.IR grn ,
.IR pic ,
.IR \%refer ,
.IR tbl ,
.IR \%soelim ,
and to the utilities
.I \%@g@indxbib
and
.IR \%@g@lookbib .
.
This feature does not apply to any programs different from the ones
above (most notably
.I groff
itself) since they are unique to the
.I groff
package.
.
.
.TP
.I GROFF_ENCODING
The value of this environment value is passed to the
.I preconv
preprocessor to select the encoding of input files.
.
Setting this option implies
.IR groff 's
command-line option
.B \-k
(this is,
.I groff
actually always calls
.IR preconv ).
.
If set without a value,
.I groff
calls
.I preconv
without arguments.
.
An explicit
.B \-K
command-line option overrides the value of
.IR \%GROFF_ENCODING .
.
See
.IR preconv (@MAN1EXT@)
for details.
.
.
.TP
.I GROFF_FONT_PATH
A list of directories in which to seek the selected output device's
directory of device and font description files.
.
See
.IR \%@g@troff (@MAN1EXT@)
and
.IR \%groff_font (@MAN5EXT@).
.
.
.TP
.I GROFF_TMAC_PATH
A list of directories in which to seek macro files.
.
See
.IR \%@g@troff (@MAN1EXT@)
and
.IR \%groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@).
.
.
.TP
.I GROFF_TMPDIR
The directory in which temporary files are created.
.
If not set,
but the environment variable
.I \%TMPDIR
is set,
temporary files are created there instead.
.
On MS-DOS and Windows platforms,
if neither of the foregoing are set,
the environment variables
.I TMP
and
.I TEMP
(in that order)
are checked also.
.
Otherwise,
temporary files are created in
.IR /tmp .
.
The
.IR \%@g@refer (@MAN1EXT@),
.IR \%grohtml (@MAN1EXT@),
and
.IR grops (@MAN1EXT@)
commands use temporary files.
.
.
.TP
.I GROFF_TYPESETTER
Set the default output device.
.
If empty or not set,
.RB \[lq] @DEVICE@ \[rq]
is used.
.
The
.B \-T
option overrides
.IR GROFF_TYPESETTER .
.
.
.TP
.I SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
A timestamp
(expressed as seconds since the Unix epoch)
to use as the creation timestamp in place of the current time.
.
The time is converted to human-readable form using
.IR ctime (3)
when the formatter starts up and stored in registers usable by documents
and macro packages.
.
.
.TP
.I TZ
The time zone to use when converting the current time
(or value of
.IR SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH )
to human-readable form;
see
.IR tzset (3).
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Examples
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I roff
systems are best known for formatting man pages.
.
Once it is has located a man page,
.RI a\~ man (1)
librarian program may execute a
.I groff
command much like the following,
constructing a pipeline to page the output.
.
.
.RS
.P
.EX
groff \-t \-man /usr/share/man/man1/groff.1.man | less \-R
.EE
.RE
.
.
.P
To process a
.I roff
input file using the preprocessors
.I tbl \" AT&T
and
.I pic \" AT&T
and the
.I me
macro package in the way to which AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
users were accustomed,
one would type
(or script)
a pipeline.
.
.IP
.EX
pic foo.me | tbl | troff \-me \-Tutf8 | grotty
.EE
.
.
.P
Using
.IR groff ,
this pipe can be shortened to the equivalent command
.
.IP
.EX
groff \-p \-t \-me \-T utf8 foo.me
.EE
.
.
.P
An even easier way to do this is to use
.IR grog (@MAN1EXT@)
to guess the preprocessor and macro options and execute the result by
using the command substitution feature of the shell.
.
.IP
.EX
$(grog \-Tutf8 foo.me)
.EE
.
.
.P
Each command-line option to a postprocessor must be specified with any
required leading dashes
.RB \[lq] \- \[rq]
.\" No GNU roff postprocessor uses long options for anything except
.\" --help or --version.
.\"or
.\".RB \[lq] \-\- \[rq]
because
.I groff
passes the arguments as-is to the postprocessor;
this permits arbitrary arguments to be transmitted.
.
For example,
to pass a title to the
.I gxditview
postprocessor,
the shell commands
.
.RS
.EX
groff \-X \-P \-title \-P \[aq]trial run\[aq] mydoc.t
.EE
.RE
.
and
.
.RS
.EX
groff \-X \-Z mydoc.t | gxditview \-title \[aq]trial run\[aq] \-
.EE
.RE
.
are equivalent.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Limitations
.\" ====================================================================
.
.P
When paging output for the
.RB \[lq] ascii \[rq],
.RB \[lq] cp1047 \[rq],
.RB \[lq] latin1 \[rq],
and
.RB \[lq] utf8 \[rq]
devices,
programs like
.IR more (1)
and
.IR less (1)
may require command-line options to correctly handle some output
sequences;
see
.IR \%grotty (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.
.P
On EBCDIC hosts such as OS/390 Unix,
the output devices
.RB \[lq] ascii \[rq]
and
.RB \[lq] latin1 \[rq]
aren't available.
.
Conversely,
the output device
.RB \[lq] cp1047 \[rq]
is not available on systems based on the ISO\~646 or ISO\~8859 character
encoding standards.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Installation directories"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I groff
installs files in varying locations depending on its compile-time
configuration.
.
On this installation, the following locations are used.
.
.
.TP
.I @APPRESDIR@
Application defaults directory for
.IR gxditview (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.
.TP
.I @BINDIR@
Directory containing
.IR groff 's
executable commands.
.
.
.TP
.I @COMMON_WORDS_FILE@
List of common words for
.IR indxbib (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.
.TP
.I @DATASUBDIR@
Directory for data files.
.
.
.TP
.I @DEFAULT_INDEX@
Default index for
.IR lkbib (@MAN1EXT@)
and
.IR refer (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.
.TP
.I @DOCDIR@
Documentation directory.
.
.
.TP
.I @EXAMPLEDIR@
Example directory.
.
.
.TP
.I @FONTDIR@
Font directory.
.
.
.TP
.I @HTMLDOCDIR@
HTML documentation directory.
.
.
.TP
.I @LEGACYFONTDIR@
Legacy font directory.
.
.
.TP
.I @LOCALFONTDIR@
Local font directory.
.
.
.TP
.I @LOCALMACRODIR@
Local macro package
.RI ( tmac
file) directory.
.
.
.TP
.I @MACRODIR@
Macro package
.RI ( tmac
file) directory.
.
.
.TP
.I @OLDFONTDIR@
Font directory for compatibility with old versions of
.IR groff ;
see
.IR grops (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.
.TP
.I @PDFDOCDIR@
PDF documentation directory.
.
.
.TP
.I @SYSTEMMACRODIR@
System macro package
.RI ( tmac
file) directory.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "\f[I]groff\f[] macro directory"
.\" ====================================================================
.
This contains all information related to macro packages.
.
Note that more than a single directory is searched for those files
as documented in
.IR \%groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@).
.
For the
.I groff
installation corresponding to this document, it is located at
.IR @MACRODIR@ .
.
The following files contained in the
.I groff macro directory
have a special meaning:
.
.
.TP
.I troffrc
Initialization file for
.IR troff .
.
This is interpreted by
.I \%@g@troff
before reading the macro sets and any input.
.
.
.TP
.I troffrc\-end
Final startup file for
.IR troff .
.
It is parsed after all macro sets have been read.
.
.
.TP
.RI name .tmac
.TQ
.IR tmac. name
Macro file for macro package
.IR name .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "\f[I]groff\f[] font directory"
.\" ====================================================================
.
This contains all information related to output devices.
.
Note that more than a single directory is searched for those files; see
.IR \%@g@troff (@MAN1EXT@).
.
For the
.I groff
installation corresponding to this document, it is located at
.IR @FONTDIR@ .
.
The following files contained in the
.I "groff font directory"
have a special meaning:
.
.
.TP
.IR dev name /DESC
Device description file for device
.IR name ,
see
.IR \%groff_font (@MAN5EXT@).
.
.
.TP
.IR dev name / F
Font file for font
.I F
of device
.IR name .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Availability
.\" ====================================================================
.
Information on how to get
.I groff
and related information is available at the
.UR http://\:www\:.gnu\:.org/\:software/\:groff
groff page of the GNU website
.UE .
.
.
.P
Three
.I groff
mailing lists are available:
.
.
.IP
.MT bug\-groff@\:gnu\:.org
bug tracker activity (read-only)
.ME ;
.
.
.IP
.MT groff@\:gnu\:.org
general discussion
.ME ;
and
.
.
.IP
.MT groff\-commit@\:gnu\:.org
commit activity (read-only)
.ME ,
which reports changes to
.IR groff 's
source code repository by its developers.
.
.
.P
Details on repository access and much more can be found in the file
.I README
at the top directory of the
.I groff
source package.
.
.
.P
A free implementation of the
.I grap
preprocessor, written by
.MT faber@\:lunabase\:.org
Ted Faber
.ME ,
can be found at the
.UR http://\:www\:.lunabase\:.org/\:\[ti]faber/\:Vault/\:software/\
\:grap/
grap website
.UE .
.
This is the only
.I grap
supported by
.IR groff .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Authors
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I groff
was written by
.MT jjc@\:jclark\:.com
James Clark
.ME .
.
This document was rewritten,
enhanced,
and put under the GNU FDL license in
2002 by
.MT groff\-bernd.warken\-72@\:web\:.de
Bernd Warken
.ME .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.IR "Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff" ,
by Trent A.\& Fisher and Werner Lemberg,
is the primary
.I groff
manual.
.
You can browse it interactively with \[lq]info groff\[rq].
.
.
.\" groff ships 62 man pages generated from 61 source files.  The
.\" numbered comments refer to their sorting order in the source tree,
.\" so that it is easier to tell that we've enumerated all of them.
.TP
Introduction, history, and further reading:
.IR roff (@MAN7EXT@), \" #23
.IR ditroff (@MAN7EXT@) \" #16
.
.
.TP
.RI "Viewer for\~" groff "\~(and AT&T device-independent)\~" troff \
\~documents:
.IR gxditview (@MAN1EXT@) \" #33
.
.
.TP
Preprocessors:
.IR \%@g@chem (@MAN1EXT@), \" #1
.IR \%@g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@), \" #34
.IR \%@g@neqn (@MAN1EXT@), \" #35
.IR \%glilypond (@MAN1EXT@), \" #4
.IR \%@g@grn (@MAN1EXT@), \" #36
.IR \%preconv (@MAN1EXT@), \" #38
.IR gperl (@MAN1EXT@), \" #5
.IR \%@g@pic (@MAN1EXT@), \" #37
.IR gpinyin (@MAN1EXT@), \" #6
.IR \%@g@refer (@MAN1EXT@), \" #39
.IR \%@g@soelim (@MAN1EXT@), \" #40
.IR \%@g@tbl (@MAN1EXT@) \" #41
.
.
.TP
Macro packages and macro-specific utilities:
.IR \%groff_hdtbl (@MAN7EXT@), \" #9
.IR \%groff_man (@MAN7EXT@), \" #55a
.IR \%groff_man_style (@MAN7EXT@), \" #55b
.IR \%groff_mdoc (@MAN7EXT@), \" #56
.IR \%groff_me (@MAN7EXT@), \" #57
.IR \%groff_mm (@MAN7EXT@), \" # 10
.IR \%groff_mmse (@MAN7EXT@), \" # 11
.IR \%mmroff (@MAN1EXT@), \" #12
.IR \%groff_mom (@MAN7EXT@), \" #13
.IR \%pdfmom (@MAN1EXT@), \" #30
.IR \%groff_ms (@MAN7EXT@), \" #58
.IR \%groff_rfc1345 (@MAN7EXT@), \" added 2021-02-01
.IR \%groff_trace (@MAN7EXT@), \" #60
.IR \%groff_www (@MAN7EXT@) \" #59
.
.
.TP
Bibliographic and index tools:
.IR \%@g@indxbib (@MAN1EXT@), \" #49
.IR \%lkbib (@MAN1EXT@), \" #50
.IR \%@g@lookbib (@MAN1EXT@) \" #51
.
.
.TP
Language, conventions, and GNU extensions:
.IR groff (@MAN7EXT@), \" #17
.IR groff_char (@MAN7EXT@), \" #18
.IR groff_diff (@MAN7EXT@), \" #19
.IR \%groff_filenames (@MAN5EXT@), \" #8
.IR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@), \" #20
.IR groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@) \" #22
.
.
.TP
Intermediate output language:
.IR groff_out (@MAN5EXT@) \" #21
.
.
.TP
Formatter program:
.IR \%@g@troff (@MAN1EXT@) \" #45
.
.
.TP
Formatter wrappers:
.\".IR groff (@MAN1EXT@), \" 42 -- this page
.IR \%@g@nroff (@MAN1EXT@), \" #44
.IR \%pdfroff (@MAN1EXT@) \" #14
.
.
.TP
Postprocessors for output devices:
.IR \%grodvi (@MAN1EXT@), \" #24
.IR \%grohtml (@MAN1EXT@), \" #25
.IR grolbp (@MAN1EXT@), \" #26
.IR grolj4 (@MAN1EXT@), \" #27
.IR lj4_font (@MAN5EXT@), \" #28
.IR gropdf (@MAN1EXT@), \" #29
.IR grops (@MAN1EXT@), \" #31
.IR \%grotty (@MAN1EXT@) \" #32
.
.
.TP
Font support utilities:
.IR \%addftinfo (@MAN1EXT@), \" #46
.IR \%afmtodit (@MAN1EXT@), \" #47
.IR \%hpftodit (@MAN1EXT@), \" #48
.IR \%pfbtops (@MAN1EXT@), \" #52
.IR \%tfmtodit (@MAN1EXT@), \" #53
.IR xtotroff (@MAN1EXT@) \" #54
.
.
.TP
Graphics conversion utilities:
.IR eqn2graph (@MAN1EXT@), \" #2
.IR grap2graph (@MAN1EXT@), \" #7
.IR pic2graph (@MAN1EXT@) \" #15
.
.
.TP
Difference-marking utility:
.IR \%gdiffmk (@MAN1EXT@) \" #3
.
.
.TP
\[lq]groff guess\[rq] utility:
.IR grog (@MAN1EXT@) \" #43
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_groff_1_man_C]
.do rr *groff_groff_1_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
