.TH mmroff @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
mmroff \- cross-referencing front end for GNU
.I roff mm
macro package
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1989-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
.\" a permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for
.\" modified versions, except that this permission notice may be
.\" included in translations approved by the Free Software Foundation
.\" instead of in the original English.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_mmroff_1_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.\" Define fallback for groff 1.23's MR macro if the system lacks it.
.nr do-fallback 0
.if !\n(.f           .nr do-fallback 1 \" mandoc
.if  \n(.g .if !d MR .nr do-fallback 1 \" older groff
.if !\n(.g           .nr do-fallback 1 \" non-groff *roff
.if \n[do-fallback]  \{\
.  de MR
.    ie \\n(.$=1 \
.      I \%\\$1
.    el \
.      IR \%\\$1 (\\$2)\\$3
.  .
.\}
.rr do-fallback
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY mmroff
.RB [ \-x ]
.IR groff-argument \~.\|.\|.
.YS
.
.
.SY mmroff
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.
.SY mmroff
.B \-\-version
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I mmroff
is a simple wrapper for
.IR groff ,
used to expand cross references in
.IR m@TMAC_M_PREFIX@m ;
see
.MR groff_mm @MAN7EXT@ .
.
It runs
.I groff
with the
.B \-mm
option twice,
first with
.B \-z
and
.B \-rRef=1
to collect cross references and update the cross-reference file,
and then again to produce the document.
.
Documents that do not use
.IR "groff mm" 's
referencing system
(the
.BR INITR ,
.BR SETR ,
.BR GETHN ,
.BR GETPN ,
.BR GETR ,
and
.B GETST
macros)
do not require
.IR mmroff .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Options
.\" ====================================================================
.
.B \-\-help
displays
a usage message,
while
.B \-\-version
shows version information;
both exit afterward.
.
.
.TP
.B \-x
Create or update the cross-reference file and exit.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Authors
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I mmroff
was written by
.MT jh@\:axis\:.se
J\[o ad]rgen H\[a ad]gg
.ME
of Lund,
Sweden.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.MR groff_mm @MAN7EXT@ ,
.MR groff_mmse @MAN7EXT@ ,
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR @g@tbl @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR @g@pic @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR @g@eqn @MAN1EXT@
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_mmroff_1_man_C]
.do rr *groff_mmroff_1_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
