.TH grolj4 @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
grolj4 \- groff output driver for HP LaserJet 4 family printers
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1994-2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
.\" a permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for
.\" modified versions, except that this permission notice may be
.\" included in translations approved by the Free Software Foundation
.\" instead of in the original English.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_grolj4_1_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Synopsis
.\" ====================================================================
.
.SY grolj4
.RB [ \-l ]
.RB [ \-c\~\c
.IR num-copies ]
.RB [ \-d
.RI [ n ]]
.RB [ \-F\~\c
.IR font-directory ]
.RB [ \-p\~\c
.IR paper-size ]
.RB [ \-w\~\c
.IR line-width ]
.RI [ file\~ .\|.\|.]
.YS
.
.
.SY grolj4
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.
.SY grolj4
.B \-v
.
.SY grolj4
.B \-\-version
.YS
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
The GNU
.I roff
LJ4 output driver translates the output of
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@
into a PCL5 format suitable for an HP LaserJet 4 printer.
.
Normally,
.I grolj4
is invoked by
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@
when the latter is given the
.RB \[lq] \-T\~lj4 \[rq]
option.
.
(In this installation,
.B @DEVICE@
is the default output device.)
.
Use
.IR groff 's
.B \-P
option to pass any options shown above to
.IR grolj4 .
.
If no
.I file
arguments are given,
or if
.I file
is \[lq]\-\[rq],
.I grolj4
reads the standard input stream.
.
Output is written to the standard output stream.
.
.
.P
An additional drawing command is available beyond those documented in
.MR groff @MAN7EXT@ .
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]D\[aq]R\~ "dh dv" \[aq]
Draw a rule (solid black rectangle), with one corner at the current
position, and the diagonally opposite corner at the current position
.RI +( dh , dv ).
.
Afterwards the current position will be at the opposite corner.
.
This generates a PCL fill rectangle command, and so will work on
printers that do not support HPGL/2 unlike the other
.B \eD
commands.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Options
.\" ====================================================================
.
.B \-\-help
displays a usage message,
while
.B \-v
and
.B \-\-version
show version information;
all exit afterward.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-c " num-copies"
Print
.I num-copies
copies of each page.
.
.
.TP
.B \-l
Print the document with a landscape orientation.
.
.
.TP
.B \-d\c
.RI " [" n ]
Use duplex mode
.IR n :
1\ is long-side binding; 2\ is short-side binding;
default is\ 1.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-p " paper-size"
Set the paper size to
.IR paper-size ,
which must be one of
letter, legal, executive, a4, com10, monarch, c5, b5, dl.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-w " line-width"
Set the default line thickness to
.I line-width
thousandths of an em.
.
If this option isn't specified, the line thickness defaults to
0.04\~em.
.
.
.TP
.BI \-F " font-directory"
Prepend directory
.IR font-directory /dev name
to the search path for font and device description files;
.I name
is the name of the device, usually
.BR lj4 .
.
.
.LP
The following four commands are available additionally in the
font description files:
.
.
.TP
.BI pclweight \ N
The integer value
.I N
must be in the range \-7 to +7; default is\~0.
.
.
.TP
.BI pclstyle \ N
The integer value
.I N
must be in the range 0 to 32767; default is\~0.
.
.
.TP
.BI pclproportional \ N
A boolean flag which can be either 0 or\~1; default is\~0.
.
.
.TP
.BI pcltypeface \ N
The integer value
.I N
must be in the range 0 to 65535; default is\~0.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Environment
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I GROFF_FONT_PATH
A list of directories in which to seek the selected output device's
directory of device and font description files.
.
See
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@
and
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ .
.
.
.br
.ne 3v \" Keep section heading and paragraph tag together.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Files
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.I @FONTDIR@/\:\%devlj4/\:DESC
describes the
.B lj4
output device.
.
.
.TP
.IR @FONTDIR@/\:\%devlj4/ F
describes the font known
.RI as\~ F
on device
.BR lj4 .
.
.
.TP
.I @FONTDIR@/\:\%devlj4/\:\%generate/\:\%Makefile
is a
.MR make 1
script that uses
.MR hpftodit @MAN1EXT@
to prepare the foregoing font description files from HP TFM data;
in can be used to regenerate the
.I groff
font descriptions in the event the TFM files are updated.
.
.
.TP
.I @FONTDIR@/\:\%devlj4/\:\%generate/\:\%special\:.awk
is an
.MR awk 1
script that corrects the Intellifont-based height metrics for several
glyphs in the
.B S
(special) font for TrueType CG Times used in the HP LaserJet\~4000 and
later.
.
.
.TP
.I @FONTDIR@/\:\%devlj4/\:\%generate/\:\%special\:.map
.TQ
.I @FONTDIR@/\:\%devlj4/\:\%generate/\:\%symbol\:.map
.TQ
.I @FONTDIR@/\:\%devlj4/\:\%generate/\:text\:.map
.TQ
.I @FONTDIR@/\:\%devlj4/\:\%generate/\:\%wingdings.map
map MSL indices and HP Unicode Private Use Area assignments to
.I groff
special character identifiers.
.
.
.TP
.I @MACRODIR@/\:lj4\:.tmac
defines macros for use with the
.B lj4
output device.
.
It is automatically loaded by
.I troffrc
when the
.B lj4
output device is selected.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Bugs
.\" ====================================================================
.
.\" XXX: What does this mean?  The period/full stop glyph?  Flyspecks?
Small dots.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.MR lj4_font @MAN5EXT@ ,
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR groff_out @MAN5EXT@ ,
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ ,
.MR groff_char @MAN7EXT@
.
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_grolj4_1_man_C]
.do rr *groff_grolj4_1_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
